Off we go.
My name is Martin Haas and eh I was born Martijn Haas in the end of 1936, eh, in Breda, a small
city in the southern Netherlands, eh, eh, wholly, just about wholly eh, eh, ca, very Catholic
city. There used to be, I think when, the time I was born, less than 200 Jews in the whole city.
There was one small synagogue that, times has been another one. Anyway, I was the fourth of four
children, to a eh, middle class middle class family. And it's a middle class because eh, eh,
my family, my father Haas, had two sisters, so I had two aunts and eh  a  my grandfather, who
died in 1933, I never knew him, my Haas grandfather, eh, died in 1933, is buried in the Jewish
cemetery in Breda. And eh  he had a, I think saved every penny he could save while working hard
and established a very credible business eh, that was on the Terheijdenstraat, which doesn't
exist anymore, eh, double herenhuis, a double house, one half was his, my grandfather's business,
it said manufacturen, eh, eh, f, firma I.E. Haas
Hmhm
Isaac Haas, manufacturen en gros. and I have pictures of that and he eh  eh, the other side was the,
was the house for eh my father and his family lived; later when my grandfather died eh it was basically
taken over by my family, by my father and family. It was, it was absolutely a, I would call it upper-middleclass
family because they owned houses all over Breda. I mean not one or two, but probably close to a, a dozen.
Eh, my father had a car, which was quite unusual in the thirties. Eh and, anyway, eh, eh, a, a very,
very established eh, eh, eh, eh family. Not rich but eh I think the family could do what it wanted and
was very careful with money. Jewish family, I know obviously, because I remember, have some memories
there, which I will, will tell about. Eh and eh, eh, I, in recent years, visited eh, eh  a year and a
half ago and six, seven years ago, I visited Breda and went to s, to, to the synagogue, which has been
rebuilt. And there eh, eh, people who are the Jewish community there showed us eh, eh, a book in which
my father with his eh, eh, eh, donated money to the congregation. And you know, on, on the holy day,
on Shabbat, that's done by folding a piece of paper and there was, was, so it was clear that he was
a supporting member of the community etcetera. Eh
Which year were you born?
I was born in October nine, October, 20th of October 1936.
And so when the war broke out I was not yet, not yet four.
Hmhm.
Eh, in fact, when my father was  eh, eh, oh, I have to, what else I have to, have to say, about this
background eh  ja, maybe, maybe you start here. Eh, in the beginning of the war, I don't know all
the details because I was small and of, having actually have not read up properly, eh, Breda was
a garrison town  of the Dutch army and navy I believe, eh, and eh, eh, so the German, the, the invading
Nazi's eh, the Germans on the fifth of May 1940, eh, targeted it eh and particularly its real reliance
it was an important eh, a connecting eh place, eh, for railways and so they targeted eh  eh, the
railway lines of Breda, the, actually the, the railway station
Hmhm
which was very close to our house and I think the bo, eh, eh the pilots
must not be, have been very good because they hit our house. And some
other houses around the Terheijdenstraat in Breda was destroyed.
Hm
And eh, nobody  of my family was hurt, I don't, do not know if others were hurt,
do not know, eh, in the same street, but eh I think eh this was at a time, the beginning
of the war, that all of Breda was emptied by the eh authorities.
Hmhm
in order to, their apparently knew there would be an, eh, an attack on the city.
And everybody walked, and I must have been very small, everybody
Four, yes
Four, or, or, yes, four, eh, everybody walked, not yet four, 3Â½ actually,
36, seven, eight, nine, in October '40, I was four. So I was 3Â½
Yes
So I remember nothing of this, eh, but everybody walked out in the di, eh, direction south to
Antwerpen and eh, so they bombed the city when it was empty and nobody was killed or anything.
So when we came back we moved in with a grand uncle, to another, another street, Speelhuislaan
and eh, we stayed there and immediately, apparently, my father eh started moves to build a new
house. And he started to move to build eh, he started building a new house for my, our immediate
family, that is father, mother and four children and eh for my two aunts eh  Celine and  Adèle
who where unmarried. They were probably unmarried because they were kind of intelligent, they
were very good eh at everything, but in nineteen thir, in the thirties, or twenties for that
matter, eh, eh, women in Holland didn't study, couldn't study.
Some did
S, very
Very few
very few, very few
And not in that region
And certainly not in that region, exactly. And so they did all kinds of things but they couldn't,
eh they could have attained eh a doctor degree or anything in, eh, anything they wished, because they've
certainly, were known to be very intelligent, but they didn't. Eh, and so he built a double house,
he bought, eh, obviously right in the beginning of the, of the war, after the house was destroyed,
bought a lot and started to build a house. And I don't know all the details about that, because
I still have to inq, eh, to investigate that. But I heard from some others who have looked into it,
from the archives in Breda, that eh, he had many, many difficulties getting building materials and
building the house and, and eh, as a Jew being able to build the house, being allowed to build a house.
And I actually remember, I must have then been, 4Â½, five, eh, prob, probably and possibly after visiting
the synagogue. It may have been Shabbat, it may have been a holyday, that my whole family, father,
mother, and four children, and I was the smallest, went to see progress of building the house. And
I remember  quite well, eh, I tell you in a moment why, how come I remember that, that there was a,
the basement was built and there were planks and what have you and we weren't allowed to walk on
that of course, eh, we did, eh, and the beg, the house was actually getting, taking shape. They were
building the in, the walls etcetera. And I remember that because we, children, I, but I'm sure also
my siblings, were very happy because in the back of the house, towards the kitchen, there was a eh,
circular stairs, staircase. Eh, eh, helical staircase going to the kitchen. So the baker and the eh,
milkman and whoever, who came to deliver to the house, to the family didn't have to go in front
where the business was going to be established. So it was very interesting. In fact, I have been back
there for a couple of times, walked to the back of the house and saw that circular staircase. It's
very interesting eh, to see that eh six, eh, 65 years after the events. That what I remember is still
there.
Wonderful.
Anyway. Eh  in eh late, in October 1941 my father got eh, obviously, eh, directions eh, eh, eh,
to be, eh, to, to show up for transport to Sobi, to eh, eh, in Friesland, what's called, eh
Westerbork?
Westerbork
That's Drenthe
Drenthe, okay, I've never been there and I don't think I will go. Eh, and from there he was eh
transpo, eh, transported to Auschwitz and I have all, of course all the dates when, when and what
and about half year later he died and I assume mo, most probably that in Auschwitz he was put to work
and after all Arbeit macht frei and they made him very frei. Eh  he died in, in eh, eh, in Auschwitz
in, I think early, oh, in sometime in '42. But I'm not really, I can look it up
Early
very early, very, quite early, quite early. Eh  we continued living one way and
the other with my mother and there were all kinds of other family mem, family,
family member and in October, forget the date, eh, 1942, eh we, the rest of the
family, received orders to appear eh for transport to eh Wester eh
Westerbork
Westerbork again.  And eh, it was delayed, or our appearance, or our transport, whatever,
was delayed because my sister had asthma. My little sister, the closest to me.  Roosje,
Rosa had eh asthma and eh, they were so eh magnanimous that when a child had asthma
they would postpone deportation to the death camps. Anyway
The names of the other siblings were?
The names were eh, the oldest was eh, eh Elisabeth, Liesje, eh, eh, the second was a boy, his name
was Isaac, the third was eh, [grins] my sister Roosje and the fourth was eh me, myself, Martin.
So the family got the orders to eh, to appear and it was a little, a little postponed, eh, then
I, again, I don't remember, I can look it up but I don't remember all the dates, eh, eh,
the evening before  eh the order to appear  eh  my mother had my, myself and my little sister,
second sister, the two, the two youngest children, whisked of to Bergen op Zoom
Hmhm.
Eh, through an organization whose name I do not recall, I can look it up, but never
mind, eh, of eh, eh lay Catholic eh, they weren't nuns, but they were social workers,
who in the area of Breda helped women with their pregnancy and with birth and a time,
some time after birth. And these women were, it, it was a Catholic organization, eh,
apparently, it so appears, had helped other cathechisten. Cathechisten
Ja.
they were called. They helped eh my mother with some of the births, I'm not eh, so sure which, mine
or my sisters or eh, other sister or brother, and they of course had helped many, many Christian, eh,
Catholic families, all over, and through them, they worked for the Underground, and through them eh,
eh, my mother found two addresses in Bergen op Zoom for the two children. The small children. The, and
indeed, the evening before they were to appear, I, I did not know that, I did not, do not remember that,
I was too eh, a little too small yet, eh, a lady came. I had never seen her and visited us in the evening,
it was dark, it, we are talking about February, no it was October, I'm sorry, eh and she came, it
was a rainy evening, and she came with a big cape, big black cape she had on, she wasn't very tall
but a big black cape, and the two children, that, one of them myself and then my sister, went under
that cape with her to the railway station, which was close,  we took the train to Bergen op Zoom. There
my sister was taken by someone else who was waiting for her and that was an eh, I do not know who it
was, of the, a man or wo, woman from the Baars family
Hmhm
and she was taken basically to them and I continued with Mrs., not Haas, but Hees, H, E, E,
S. Interesting. Eh, I was Haas, he was Hees, and eh, was put to sleep, to bed and eh, until
the next morning.  Eh, I stayed in Bergen op Zoom eh, actually very interesting stories, eh,
until fffff, at least 1946, even though we were, the south was liberated on the 27th Bergen
op Zoom, was liberated on 27th of October 1944, half a year before the rest of the country,
eh because the, the eh Allies had to still cross the big rivers and it was a big job, was very
difficult. And eh, so we had been free since '44, I stayed at least another year. I'm not
eh quite sure exactly how long, eh, there, because, of course, first the war wasn't finished
and when the war was finished nobody knew what to do with me.
Sure
They basically didn't know what to do with me.  Eh  in Bergen op Zoom it, of course is very
important to remember, jawel eh first of all, I never saw my, my sister eh in Bergen op Zoom,
though both of us were in the same town. I was sent a few months after I arrived, I stayed,
I think indoors for a while, eh, like a couple of months, and then I was sent to school. And
the school was right across the family, the Hees family home, and there was one person who
was informed of who this sudden kid who showed up was and eh that was my teacher and she was
in the secret, and I went to school and I started to learn. And I'm told now, recently, that
I could learn very well. I didn't know [grins] I remember nothing
[laughs]
and that's what they say, I don't know [laughs]
Yes professor Haas
Ohoh, thank you very much. No, I actually didn't know. And eh, eh, and I did my schooling, I had
a terrible handwriting, I remember that, eh, but anyway, I did learn. I did learn. And I grew up perfect,
eh, eh, reasonably nor, reasonably normally, except that there were all kinds of arrangements. If the
Gestapo were to come, what they would do with that, with me. And I don't remember this, these things
have been told to me by some of the sisters and brothers from eh the family.
Before you go on with
Yes
the life in eh
Bergen op Zoom, can we for a moment go back to
Let's go back
Breda?
Sure!
What are your earliest memories about Breda?
Oh!
Do you still, well, I don't know
Good question.
Because you skipped it.
Yes, yes, yes, oh, yes, I can, I can't tell a bit, but quite a bit. Anyway, eh, I remember,
very well, and I must have been four, going with my father and my, my, my other brother, my
older brother, to the synagogue. In Breda. And that was a walk of  oh, I know now where it is,
it was probably fifteen minutes, something like that. And I have, remember some other things.
Eh, going to the synagogue, and I remember very well what the synagogue looked like inside.
I obviously was there, I don't think that I was standing there, politely with everybody else,
was sitting and probably fooled around, sat around, walked around, whatever, eh, but I remember
what the day was.  Which is why I remember exactly what the synagogue looked like, inside.
Eh, the day must have been Yom Kippur. Because on Yom Kippur in the afternoon the  [emotional]
the kohanim, eh, deliver a blessing to the congregation.
Sure
And it's a very weird eh  blessing, song, tune and they put their tallit, their praying shawl
over their heads and all the kohanim with the congregation stand there, in front of the arc
and they say this blessing. And this must have made such a bizarre impression on me
As a small kid
as a small kid, w, and it's still bizarre when you hear it these days
Sure
but I'm not a small kid anymore at all, eh, and it must have been Yom Kippur, 'cause that's
the only time that this is done. And, so I was probably emotionally involved due to which I remember
the inside of that synagogue.  Indeed, eh, some years ago, I think in 2000, that synagogue was redone,
rebuild by the  City of Breda and some other authorities  and I've went to visit it. And as I
walked in, I really didn't have to see much. Because it was identical to the picture I have in
my mind. Identical. And synagogues differ of course. One from the other. But it couldn't have
been anything else and I remember hence from my eh, I was probably f, late f, eh, four, 4Â½, maybe
five, I'm not really sure, I could calculate exactly how m, but just about that, I remember because
of this bizarre event of the eh blessing of the eh, of the, of the kohanim, the priest. I remember
very well eh, this, the, the way that, that synagogue looked. And it still looks like that today,
because it has been re eh redone in  [emotional] .
You tell me when you just want me to stop the camera
It doesn't matter.
Okay.
I remember other things, I remember eh, when the, in the second house I lived, in the h, after the
b, after our house was bombed, eh, that I learned to ride a bike. [emotional] The boys on the street.
Because in front of that house in the Speelhuislaan, there was a very wide, unused, because it,
it, it went to nowhere, sidewalk, and the kids played there and it was actually, eh, quite a broad
street. And eh, very little traffic. And so we bought a bike and I learned to ride a bike. And again,
it's something, it's very important I think psychologists know this very well, some, eh, eh,
if, eh, eh, events in which you are emotionally involved, you remember.
[coughs] absolutely.
And so I remember. So I remember very well. Eh learning to ride a bike. There, and being totally
eh, eh, ecstatic eh riding by myself, they pushed me, pulled me, eh, got to , you got to be going.
And I learned to ride a bike there. What else do I remember? Oh, I remember various other things,
eh, I remember the house we were living in, this is eh, the second house. Eh, like a Dut, like
mo, like many Dutch hou, homes, eh, there are rooms, one after the oth, one, one, on beyo, behind
the other, but blablabla, and then of course, and then there is a passage way and across there
there is a passage to the kitchen and there is a bathroom or whatever. And eh, it obviously was,
eh winter or it was cold and the living rooms, where one ate, eh, of wherever were, were warmed,
but not the corridors and not the bathrooms and so I remember I was afraid, as a little kid, to
cross that dark eh, eh, corridor to the bathroom.
And your sleeping rooms weren't, that
I do not actually remember anything about
warmed
it. Don't remember.
[laughs] Okay.
I have visited those places after eh, n, not all that long ago. And seen them and  eh, it fits,
it fits, it's, actually to me that, to me it's an interesting eh, eh, to me personally
it's an interesting phenomenon how one actually remembers quite clearly eh specific events.
When you're four or five. It's thought that you don't remember anything be eh, much beyond
that, but if you, if you are mostly involved you do. Eh, other events, eh  not really, I, it's
difficult to distinguish if I eh remember events from eh, eh, because I've seen pictures
or talk to my eh, eh, s, only surviving eh, eh sister about that
That
for, because I really remember. What's that?
It's a sister, Bergen op Zoom?
That's right. The other sister also survived.  The sister survived. I mean, there was myself
and it's the other sister and myself, two little ones survived. Eh, my mother and the two other
children were transported to Sobibor, to eh, yeah, well, to eh Westerbork and then from Westerbork
to Vught and from Vught to Westerbork and in the end, eh, it's all beautifully registered by
eh those wonderful Dutch, eh, they helped nicely eh, like eh, hele goeie ambtenaren to eh send
people to their death and eh, in the end they were transported to Sobibor and, and
They were the quite industrious
They were quite industrious, yes, and quite helpful, yeah, right,
eh  that's  Breda, I as such, I have nothing lost in Breda, eh
You haven't told me any memory of your mother
Hardly. I really don't know if, what I remember is a memory or
is induced by pictures I, I have, I've seen, barely, barely.
Hmhm
Eh  not really, vague, vague, vague.  I know some funny, funny customs that
she always liked the chairs around the table in the living room to be set
op de, at an angle to the table, inviting somebody to st, to pull
it back and sit down or something, eh, crazy things like that. Eh, no I actually have
very little memory of that. Eh, too small, not in, emotionally involved, eh, properly
function  I don't know, so there was no emotion, no emotion for, often.
One last question about Breda. Going away, do you remember that moment?
Very well!
That you say goodbye
Oh yes!
You, you were sleeping somewhere else
Oh!
Tell me what
I remember some things I was told.  Eh  yeah, well, you ask
about the mother [grins], it's interesting. [emotional]
Sorry
Eh, sh, I w, I knew very well  that I was a Jewish boy  and she told me that
that's a secret. I keep that to myself. I remember that. I wasn't to tell
anybody. I think she was smart enough to know what was going on.
Hmhm
And eh, she also said that she sent me away, I don't know why also my sister, because I knew how to
shut up.  And she knew when I was four or five that I was somebody who could just keep it inside.
Hmhm
And not say a word.  So there was not much of a danger that I would tell,
that I would, eh have, others participate in my quote secrets and so she
knew that I could do that. But that's it. Nothing beyond that.
Hm
Eh, interestingly, my sister, my, my older sister, who survived, eh was a little
older, a year and a half only, which makes a major difference, because she remembered
much when, she's gone, she's gone now, eh, she remembered much more.
Hm
Much more. And in fact because of that she suffered much more.
Sure.
Much more.
I understand
Eh  in Bergen op Zoom a very interesting, I think that's interesting, eh, these
eh  ladies who worked for there in the Underground [cries] funny huh?
No, it's old memories, painful memories, it, it is very normal
gekraak van papier Anyway, these eh,
If it doesn't bother you
No
it doesn't matter, bother me
Not at all
Okay
Eh,  one has no control of that.
No of course not! [laughs]
These eh two eh  lay sisters, or, or, or, eh, social workers, whatever, eh, eh exchanged
a letter they sent, they allowed my sister and me and I, I did not know where she
was, and my sister, I don't think she knows eh, knew where I was, eh, allowed me,
allowed us to exchange a little letter once eh, twice a year. Every half year. [scrapes
throat] Excuse me. And I actually still have them, have some.
Hm
And I have actually s, I think two of them eh, here, oh, copies and eh  eh  they would
deliver them. They also once or maybe, eh more than once, but I have a letter, at least
one from them who wrote to me 'how are you doing, are you learning well, are you behaving',
blablabla', that sort of stuff. They never signed their names.
Of course not
Of course not eh, eh, I have not, I don't think their letters are even dated, I remember.
Eh, but anyway, eh, so some connection remained but very little.  Eh, after the war  it wasn't
quite clear to the family where I was staying, what to do with me. Because there was nobody!
Really the entire family was so efficiently murdered, eh and eh so first there was an uncle,
but whom I can't talk very much because I don't actually know very much, eh, this was the
only mem, eh, eh, brother of my mother who, with his wife, eh, and two boys, survived the war.
I don't know how or were, eh, for kind of rather irrelevant reasons I never had much contact
with them, but anyway, this was the obvious place for me to go. I went there, they lived in
Amsterdam, you know all of these people coming from, after the war, lived in eh, eh, apartments
that were, or houses, whatever, apartments, taken from
NSB
NSB'ers. Exactly.
Dutch fascists
Yes
Yep, and [grins], right, and eh, so they lived some place in de Lairessestraat, that was,
we lived at that time and they had decided to, now it's enough, quit Judaism, we are not
Jews anymore. So I don't think it worked very well to become Christian or nothing, eh,
and, anyway, in the process I wa, I was, I was sent there, eh and they eh sent me to a austere
Christian school in Amsterdam-Zuid, very close to the Rijksmuseum.
Hmhm
Eh, Instituut Schreuder, which is evangelical, I'm not really quite sure what, I remember it is,
I was a whi, one year and I hated it. Did I ever hate it! [grins] And it didn't work out f, to, for
me to be with that uncle and eh then, I'm not sure  who the authorities were [emotional] but they
started sending me eh every weekend or every now and, eh, now and then to families in the north and
the east and the south and all, all over, who wanted to eh adopt a child. To, for me to go and see
there would I like it there. And they sent me, I am not sure who it was, eh, to, well, I certainly
remember three, four clearly, where I went eh, by train, eh, they sent me on the t, they got me on
the train and I went there and I, I was collected and spent two, three days in these people's homes
and eh they probably always were very nice, eh, but they weren't my cup of tea. For one thing it
was clear  and that's a leitmotif in my life, it was clear  to me that they were all of course eh,
eh Christian families. And I did not want to become a Christian. That age.
Well you were then, what age, you were ten?
No, no, I was like eh, seven, eight.
That young, ja, sorry
It was quite young
Sorry
It was quite young, yeah, I don't s, ate properly, I don't actually understand it myself.
How come I was so adamant, so somebody must have [grins] put it in my head or told me, probably
my fa, my mother, I don't really know, I don't remember, but I didn't like any of them,
I [laughs] I learn, I learned a lot of stuff. The experience was interesting.
Come on! Seven! [laughs] Experience interesting!
The experience was interesting because I've never had anything like this be, before
[laughs] in that, and then I go back to Bergen op Zoom a few, a few items
Yes please
Because after lunch or dinner, I don't remember, eh, the Bible came on the table and eh the Bible
was read.  So that generally was a, you know eh, f, father and the mother bended and, a women, sometimes
there was a child, sometimes not, in those families, and in some of them the Bible came out and was
read and I have nothing against the Bible nor reading it after dinner or lunch, or dinner it probably
was, but eh, it wasn't my cup of tea. I understood what was going on, njet!  Anyway  eh before I
continue there on the, eh, this, eh, historical relation, eh, eh,  the family I was with in Bergen
op Zoom was, if you wish, a quite simple family in, in that eh, eh, not simple morally, but eh, or
ethically, but eh, the father was a, had been a cook in the Dutch army
Hmhm
eh, Woensdrecht I think, and of course once the Dutch army was eh defeated there was no work, so
he worked all through the war as a waiter in a restaurant where he had to serve beer to the German
soldiers and who knows what, I never came there of course. Eh and eh the family barely scraped by,
it was very difficult. I remember a long period of time, I don't know if it was many months or
months, I do not really know that, probably it was eh, eh, well, it must have been eh through fourt,
'44, that eh we were sent to school in the morning with a piece of bread and some brown sugar.
Period. There just was no, not much to eat. And eh  eh, but anyway, we survived.
Did you get the same share as the other children?
Oh, no doubt about it! Ohohoh
Did they care if you really
There is no doubt about it
No, but they, they cared well for you?
They cared extremely well for me. In fact  I think [emotional] after
the, the eh,  eh  bev, eh, bev, Bevrijding, what is it eh?
Liberation
Anyway, yeah, after Liberation  [emotional] eh, when there was a question, well, what to do
with this kid? They weren't going to keep me and not because they didn't want to, but [emotional]
and  this is hard for me to say, eh, to remember, eh, the mother, moeder Hees told me that eh,
oh, you go back to your people. They weren't going to keep me. They weren't going to make
me Catholic. They knew that's where I would belong, where I belonged.
That's very sweet
Oh pff, because, and how sweet that was, because my sister was with another family, also
Catholic of course, and during the war, no, maybe after the war, I'm not sure, they
had her baptized, in fact, by then she was taken up in the religious activities of the
family to such a degree that I s, think she may have asked to be baptized
Hmhm
and she stayed with them after the war. But that's a different story, we all, we  a little
while. Eh, so that was a major difference. That family was to some degree more sophisticated,
yes, they were more sophisticated, than, the, the very simple family I spent the war with,
relatively simple, eh, I should say and by simple I don't mean anything, anything eh, derogatory,
on the contrary, they obviously were of very high ethical standards
Absolutely
obviously
Did you love them?
What's that?
Did you love your foster mother?
Oh yes!  Oh yes! I mean, after the war, eh, when I was already, it comes in a
moment, in Amsterdam, I, I went there several times a year eh to visit her, visit
her, visit them, visit my sister who stayed in Bergen op Zoom, because I was,
stayed in Amsterdam. Eh, and, oh yes. And it was mutual [emotional]
Wonderful
Anyway  eh with my s, my wondering I didn't want to go here or there, then in the
end, I don't know how, of course everybody was looking for everybody, and a second
cousin of my father eh  eh my grandfather and her grandfather were brothers
Hmhm
found me
invited me over to Amsterdam where they, again lived in a small apartment, had to be, had been occupied
by NSB, NSB-er would be send out, with and, and, eh, eh, chased up, and eh, from the first moment I loved
being there  they eh adopted me and they were my parents for ever, ever after. Until they died. Eh  and
that actually is the beginning of my life. The rest was, to a large degree a mishmash. Yes, I learned
to read and write and arithmetic and various other things, but there was no order.
No, I can imagine!
On my tenth birthday I came to them.  So my first ten years were, well, first year, you know,
very young years, and then at the, eh, my, up till the age of ten was kind of a questionable
situation. A. was I going to be alive or not, B. eh where was I going to be, how was I going
to be and eh, anyway, my tenth birthday. I went to school, public school in Amsterdam  and
that was very good, I had a very good teacher, I remember that very well, for three years,
eh, fourth, fifth, sixth grade and eh learned a lot, no doubt about it.
And that was a different school than the one you were on before?
Oh absolutely.
Okay
Yeah. The school I was before was, yeah, was, sure, it was an openbare
school. Eh, eh, eh, eh, public school. Was very good.
I sometimes ask questions to
Oh do!
make it audible for the others
Yes, of course. Anyway, eh, and here started a very good time. Eh, for me, I mean, time  for, to
actually live. Eh  in the meantime [blows nose]  my parents, quote, unquote, their name was eh Oudkerk,
eh, father well known Dutch Jewish family  eh how then, how that Jewish family was names,  name Oudkerk
is not clear, I have been trying to figure that out but eh, don't really know, eh, they did not
come from Ouderkerk, eh, they came se, apparently some place from Friesland, but they were a long
established Jewish family, there were many members. Anyway, eh, in the meantime, my sister stayed
with the family in Bergen op Zoom, eh  who asked to adopt her. Asked to get, the, the authorities
to adopt her and here comes the [emotional], that's the saddest story of my life [cries] it's
hard to tell  and here comes  the story of Anna Verheij, niet?
Ja.
Jewish Orphans
The Jewish Orphans
It's
my adopting parents wanted to have my sister too. So the two children
could grow up together.  And there was a big, big court case. In the
About your sister?
I'm sorry?
About my sister. I, at the time I didn't know anything about it. Or very, very little.
Let me explain to those who look at the image, eh, the Jewish community
reclaimed children as theirs, and there were many court cases, yes
Oh sure, there were many, many, many. And this was, this was,
this went on, eh, in front of a eh court in Den Bosch
Sure
and of course a, totally
Bergen op Zoom is the jurisdiction of Den
Right
Bosch
Right, totally eh, Catholic eh environment and eh one would think well, well
first of all there was this inclination, was the name Van der Molen
Gesina van der Molen
Van der Molen, ja, there were many people who considered these
Jewish eh, eh children, eh, as pleegch, eh, plicht eh
Foster
foster chi, foster children, even though what they really were was eh, was, was, was children
without their parents. And so they wanted to keep them all, or pushed to keep them all with the
families who had cared for them and had good reasons, there were, there were logically speaking
good reasons for them. But I think there were at least 2,000 of those children.
It's enormous
And the Jewish community wanted them back. Anyway, the following happened. Eh, eh, a well-known
attorney, who was a, a, a, a friend of the Oudkerk family, two  Gerard Polak
Hmhm
You may know the name?
Sure
And he got it so far, that the court I think, I'm not really totally sure about this, got
eh, eh, eh, eh, eh, the, the, eh, got the judge to agree to eh, eh face what we would call
a Solomonic judged, jud, eh, justice. Let's get the child and ask her!  My parents wanted
her with us and then I,  them I say that eh, eh, my sister, Roosje, came to visit us two,
three times a year in Amsterdam and I went to visit her in Bergen op Zoom a couple of times
a year, so we knew each other very well, we enjoyed each other very well, we would have grown
up beautifully together, definitely, eh  but she was caught there by, by eh, a family, a very,
ethically very good family, but they wanted to gain the soul for
our Lord, and probably loved her. Well, that is, eh, an interesting story. I'll tell you in a moment.
Eh  so in the court, the court decided to invite the child.  And I'm not sure whether she was in
the courtroom  or if she was observed by a, a eh, a social worker, one of the two, and she was asked:
'do you want to go' but she was asked in the presence, that, my sister told me, so I know, in the
presence of a, her adopting parents. Who had  adopted her. Would you like to go and live with your
brother in Amsterdam, or would you like to stay with us in Bergen op Zoom? The family who had had her
for five years or there about.  And she told me later, she was so afraid  of the terror that would
happen with the family's mother, the Baars family, if she said, had said, oh no I want to go and
live with my brother in Amsterdam  that she says no, I want to stay where I am.  Which was, was a single
sentence, a disaster in her life, because at that time, in the small town of Bergen op Zoom, she was
a smart kid, she went to a eh third class high school, they, she learned to become a, a, [grins]  a
nursing school teacher, one of those high professions, she could have gotten a free profession of any
sort. And it was later obvious that that was the story, but she was in that environment, they didn't
do that, one didn't do that, she went to Catholic schools and the nurses, whom she hated, in short,
she hated her whole life, there. And in fact the
She didn't get the education she could have
and she didn't get the education she cou, she could, could have gotten, eh, there are other
aspects eh to this even, eh, and eh, and eh she, she grew up without me. And I grew up without
her.  Eh  when I see, when I read, and I haven't read Alma Verheij, Verheij, haven't read
the book of, on, on, all, the only recently found out about it, kind of recently, by, by reading
eh Lipschits  eh  the Kleine Shoah, about it and I [grins], I want to get the book and read it,
but eh, I don't need to be told anything about this period. I lived it!
But the choices has been described by Diana Wolff
I don't know that.
That's the name of the book
Really?
Yes. I'll talk about it later
You tell, you give me that, that source please. I'm gonna read it.
I'll give you my review
Good.
[laughs] Okay
Very good.
I wrote it in English, review of it, I'll cut this out with a
Later, good
You'll, you'll be enlightened [laughs]
Very good, very good, very good
I'm a historian [laughs]
And
I'm not a therapist you are talking to [laughs]
What's that?
I'm not a therapist, you're talking to
[laughs]
a historian so I know
Yes
I know
I know the literature
[laughs] Very good. Thank you.
Okay.
So anyway
Continue
So anyway, I li, eh, a real redeeming part of my life was that in 1940, yes
when I came to Amsterdam, in Amsterdam, eh, I was encouraged to, I was  asked
to, suggested to, eh join a Jewish youth federation, Tikwatenoe
Hmhm
and eh, that was great. That was  where I belonged.  And of course I made friends and, and, did all
kinds of things together. I learned about Judaism and about everything else, and eh, eh  I'm not
sure whether the leaders, who were all young men  eh  who were leading us there, then in these groups,
whether they knew of the significance of the work they were doing.  They possibly did, but I can
attest to it that they did very well [emotional] . They did a wonderful job.  Eh, I did a variety
of things at that time, eh, some things of course I will never forget. I don't know what the year
was, it must have been '48 or '49, that for the High Holy days, the eh, Dutch radio had a  maybe
eight minute program about Yom Kippur, eh Rosh Hashanah and Yom Kippur, on the radio, on the official
Dut, on the queen's own radio,  and I sang there eh, I had a little soprano, I sang at a choir of
Tikwatenoe and I eh sang there solo, Awinoe Malkenoe. And of course that was in an recording studio
in, it was live. Eh and of course I will never forget that, eh
You still, still sing it?
[laughs] No [laughs] No, I can sing, but eh, no, I won't [laughs] the
don't, don't challenge me [laughs] I don't have a soprano anymore either.
Eh  and there were other things, for example eh  eh, I with the man who was,
who had that, the youth federation that time was Hans Bloemendal.
Oh!
Who became hoogleraar, professor, eh by chemistry in Nijmegen, he is still alive
Sure
and I, years later, visited him several times in Nijmegen eh, visited him in Amsterdam, in his apartment
in s, in the south eh, Zuid, eh, knew his wife, eh not well, but eh met more than on, more than a few
times, and eh, he at one time, or another decided, oh, let's put it this way, the eh Jewish youth
federation in 1948 got an invitation to send a delegation to congratulate the queen Wilhelmina, now
that's history, for her fiftieth anniversary on the throne. And queen, the queen Wilhelmina received,
I think it was, must have been September '48, received a, all these little delegations to congratulate
her. In the palace on the Dam.  So I was one of two children, there was another little girl, eh, and
then met Hans Bloemendal, en we went actually into the eh area of royalty and we met the queen, eh,
to congratulate her for her fifty years of reign and eh, with the delegation again, with Tikwatenoe.
And there is a, irrelevant but nevertheless significant interesting, [grins], eh, a little event that
happened there, so we were there and we were given tea and we had tea, a little, eh, cups of tea, with
sugar, [grins] and the little girl, I forget her name unfortunately, eh, eh, used to eh, eh, the hunger
in the war, when the tea was up, was drunken, was, was, consumed, she took her little spoon and started
to eat the sugar out of the
I still do
you still do?
[laughs]
Well, they don't do this, I can tell you, on the Paleis on the Dam, because a lady, an eh,
It's bad behavior
attending lady
it's bad behavior
well, let, yes, [laughs], I never forget that, came and said, you, eh, to the little girl whose
name I don't recall, eh, she said, you know something? We don't have to do that anymore
now. Meaning: after the war. And I never forget this, this was very interesting.
And we gave the queen, I wonder where it is, a little Torah scroll, a scroll eh and then
we left the, of course that, that's the end of it. But there were many, many very, eh,
positive events. Eh, during that period in Amsterdam. . Eh  the, my adopting parents, the
family Oudkerk, decided eh, and I was, I heard of this time and again, but fortunately obviously
part of the, the decision, to emigrate to Israel  eh  eh, their friends and acquaintances
after the war eh, all were of the opinion there was no, no future for Jews in Holland, and
even up till today, it's not kind to say to you, or to anybody
Go ahead
yes, yes, yes, I think that maybe they have been right  because what I see, s, living in San Diego today,
where there are, I don't know, 50-60,000 Jews, a major com, community with major community senders,
many, many activities, eh, two dozen congregation of every shade and, and type, eh, very vibrant Jewish
life, which did not exist when I came first to San Diego in 1969. It was very small, there were, eh,
a couple of synagogues,  very small. It has grown like crazy. To see the, and I'll use that word,
the kind of, kind of, I should be careful, pitiful Jewish community in Holland now, that consi, that
thought that there is no future for the Jews in Holland, may to some degree have been right. Whether
it is or isn't is a question of opinion and I would hope that the community, eh the Jewish community
in Holland would grow and thrive to a 120 or 200.000 again. It may, who knows, we cannot eh, eh, I'm
not among the prophets and we don't know. But it is, it is, eh, when I go to Holland and I see the
Jewish community, even though I much enjoyed the meeting here for the, for the eh, with the eh Sobibor
Foundation, eh, with all the people, I enjoyed them very, very much in many ways, eh, and that's what,
this was actually vibrant as such, eh, very active, eh, I don't know how, how, how well eh Dutch Jewry
is doing today. Anyway, it was decided in 1949 we are going to eh, eh, to Israel. We emigrated. But
the Oudkerk's, here, eh, my, my now father and mother, decided in '49 when the war in Israel was
over, the War of Independence was over, to go and have a look. And they left for eh, I don't know
how long, two, three weeks, to see where they're were to gonna go. Do they really want to go there?
It was quite of a backward country at the time, it was really, well, everything was backward. Eh, after
the war it was awful. But eh, they came back and eh decided yes, this is it and on the sixth of March,
1950, we took the first inaugural flight of the KLM  from Schiphol to eh, at the time called Lida Airport.
We arrived there and eh  took the bus I think, yes, I took the bus to a small town Nahariya. Which is
in the north on the coast. North of Haifa. Not far from the Lebanese border and this all by itself is
a very interesting story. Nahariya was established, was non, a non, non-existed piece of land, orange
groves or whatever, eh in the twenties and in the early mid thirties German Jews who were smart enough
to know what was going on, left for Palestine and established a town there. And the town was a eh, a
agricultural town. Nahariya. Along a little, tiny stream, called the Ga'aton and eh, they established
a town, I think at the time we came there, there were 1200 people in the town, eh, pretty, pretty, pretty
nice houses, eh, well organized and eh, eh, the entire town s, spoke not Hebrew  but German.  All my
friends in school were, were, were from German families and in fact all of their families were doctors
and in fact one of my friends was the son of a doctor, doctor, doctor.  Neuberger.-
He had, the man had three doctorates. In law, in this and that, I don't remember in what in all, in
all of what, but, so it was a highly sophisticated community in which I fell to learn. All my friends
were sons and daughters of eh, of eh  eh, the cream of the crop of German Jewry unbelievable, unbelievable.
Eh, I learned a great deal there. I mean, literature and music and philosophy and, you name it, was
daily talk.  Eh, this is what occupied us, schools were good and eh, eh, in fact I remember not too far
from us, a block or two away, there was a house by a, a family, eh doctor Bloch and doctor Bloch was,
of course he is gone by now, or many years, eh, I don't recall from were, was a authority on western
religions and was a professor, I forget where Karlsruhe some place in, in the western, western part of
eh, of Germany, and of course he was smart enough to leave on time and to join eh, there were German
Jews everywhere, but joined Nahariyah and eh, he eh, made a living, or they made a living, by shutteling
the dry cleaning, shirt, jackets and  sheets to a plant in Haifa, eh, thirty kilometers away, eh, and
that was their work. But he was on, but on Sundays, that's one example, on, not  on Shabbat, no, no,
non, we don't, resting day, on, on Shabbat afternoon, they had a kafik lunch and they invited whoever
they could from the community of from outside  and the visitors or whatever and there was a discussion,
in German, about some of the most sophisticated ideas of western civilization, or ethics or religion
or literature or you name it. And after that of course there was coffee and cake. And I attended, eh
I don't know how many, twenty, thirty, forty, who knows how many, mostly those sessions. And this was
an absolutely incredible situation. That in a place, in which there was nothing but minor agriculture
and some commerce, eh  eh, there was a, a shabbat meeting or Sunday meeting, weekend meeting, of this
sort! So it was an incredible, eh, environment, in fact an incredible environment to, to grow up in.
The doctor who would see me when I was sick with one thing or the other in that eh small town of Nahariya,
eh, he had been a doctor in Germany, but for years he had had a grocery store. in Nahariya. How many
doctors can you have in, can you all be a doctor and take care of each other? No! So anyway, it was a
very, very interesting place.
I assume not very religious?
Eh, am I, yes, yes, bit sorry, yes.
I mean, that kind German Jewry
Yes?
was not terribly religious?
No, was not terribly religious at all. No.
Exactly
Hardly. Hardly. There were, there were religi, no, no, German Jewry was so in, assimilated eh
What's that?
Bürgertum
Ja, ja, ja, ja, exactly. Eh, however, the intellectual level of the families and the children who
were my friends was above and beyond. I have never ever met any, anything like it. Not even eh today
I'm a, I'm, I'm, eh, part of a university community, eh, significant university of the university
of California and in San Diego, eh  eh  the l, the intellectual level of our parties eh, eh, with
our colleagues eh  does not necessarily reach the intellectual level of what went on when I was
a teenager in Nahariya. Unbelievable! Unbelievable! Quite a few, not too many, but quite a few of
them, after, after the, eh, eh, eh, in the fifties, eh, after the danger had passed, went back to
Germany, eh  eh  how they did that is not clear to me, but they did. Eh, and I have some friends,
they don't know I sit here, eh, who were famous professors, my age, eh, v, v, ever since the fifties,
who studied  mathematics in Hamburg and, and, and, professors of shipbuilding in, in, in, in Bremen
and who knows where, all over the place.
They were the cream of the crop. And they couldn't stay there forever. And they chose not to go,
well besides the, Germany gave them restitution of  to another, so they had a base to come back to
in, in Germany. And some went back eh, but it was an absolutely eh, almost Kafkaesque situation.
You went to school there?
I went to school there. I finished eh, elementary school and high school, which was very, very good,
I mean, eh just like Ge, eh, the, Ge, eh, like eh Dutch Jewry wanted its children back. To recreate
the eh, the eh, the community! Or to have some assets, some, some, some hope of recreating the m,
community, eh, Israel in its early years, eh, put a lot of effort, there wasn't a lot of money,
but a lot of effort, significant effort in eh, in the children and so they got the fi, I had the finest
teachers you can imagine. The finest teachers in, in the, in the early fifties, in elementary school
which I finished there and then high school. I mean, from ninth grade until twent, twelve, eh, teachers
who eh, I had a chemistry teacher who was a Russian eh young woman from eh Moscow, eh, who had run
away during the war years to Shanghai  who got her education in Shanghai and after that came to Israel.
And she taught me chemistry. I had a eh, a eh math and physics teacher of the same, exactly the same
sort. He had come to Israel from, again, Shanghai and eh, eh, and they later went on to academics
eh the academic eh, they had doctorates and went to academic eh positions etcetera, and they were
my high school teachers. The same in English. I had a teacher who, again, Russian, whom we didn't
see this at the time, because they came from China of all places, Jews came from China, emigrated
to Israel and started to teach and they were the finest, the finest I've ever seen, ever met, ever
seen. Anyway,  eh, in eh, in 1956 I
would you mind to slow down for a moment?
I will slow down, totally!
Because you rush through history
I rush through, okay
[laughs]
[laughs] please
And you take five years at a time [laughs]
[laughs] Yeah, what else? Oh yes, oh, oh, there is a, let's go to a side story.
Okay
So I'm living in Nahariya, the small town in Northern Israel, eh  and every year, prox, proximately
every year, eh, we got, the family got some money back, slowly but surely in the late, late forties
and, in, in, into the fifties, eh, that was money that my f, my parents left behind, eh and eh
so I had, I could and I did eh travel back to Holland to see my sister.
Hm
And some other
That was a question which
Came out
came up in my mind
Yeah
what happened to your sister
Where, there is my sister. My sister was in Holland and she
got eh education and eh, everything was fine as such.
So you traveled back to her?
I traveled back to her and eh, eh, at that time, probably what I'm going to, to relate to, eh, and
I, and I was eh, with that family for a week or two and we went to the beach and did all kinds of
fun things, and you managed very, very well and eh, and that, eh, this was a time eh, that, at that,
oh, at the time that I was in high school, in Israel, and had really superb teachers, eh, I knew,
I learned a lot. And you do in Israel actually, of history, and eh, ethics and eh, eh, religions I
shouldn't only say, eh, with Judaism, religions, it was all around, it was, it was of a very high
level. Eh, eh, and so I had knowledge and opinions eh, very much in the, ja, I would say eh Israeli
eh, eh,  eh  in, let's say in, an intelligent Israeli eh, or, I had, I had knowledge and opinion
of an intelligent Israeli high school student. Okay? And there, we had, eh, my sister and I had significant
discussions, when I would meet, significant discussions about what is right and what is wrong and
where we came from, what would you do, blablabla, and eh, at one point eh, and we had these discussions
eh long discussions, many hours, at one point eh, I do not know in response to what, she says 'you
know I don't know the answer to the question or to that point, go talk to my priest'.  Because,
in a small town in Holland, in, in Catholic Holland, a priest had a  and all these people were his
people, his sheep. And she had a priest and apparently she managed very well with that priest. She
was a smart girl and eh, and, and, and priests are often, they often are deviant but, in some ways,
but in many other ways they are often very smart people. And eh, so she got a lot from him, eh, not
necessarily on the Catholicism, but also in other ways. And eh, so she told me, in, in response to
I don't know what question, 'go talk to my priest'. So one day she made an appointment for me
and I went to see her parish priest.
Hm
In the church, eh, two blocks away. And I was sitting there, talking to him eh  and I came there, I
recall it, four in the afternoon and I was there until eleven p.m. At night, 23 hours. Talking, talking,
talking, talking, I don't know if I ate something or not, if I wasn't hungry, I don't know, it
doesn't matter. We had, I had with that priest an incredible, incredible discussion. And what it
was all about, I do not remember. But I do remember that that priest was too free minded, open minded
and was replaced to some far away little place later, because he was not really following the lines
of the church. But the result was that the next year, my sister decided to come on a trip to Israel.
I had been there two, three, four times and she decided, well, what's this, what's my brother doing
there, what does it look like? And she came on a trip. To Israel.
This, this  supported her to
I do not know. I do not know.  And eh, so she came to  Israel and we had a wonderful time together
and we traveled by bus all over the country, it was kind of odious? in some ways, we went to, eh,
you name it, we went there. Far away. And eh, we slept, in fact, I remember exact, eh, these things
in, in, in eh monastery, guest houses, in Tiberias and the same in Jerusalem and we went to the Dead
Sea, all kinds of things. And she had a wonderful time. But, vacation was over, she went back to
Holland.  Little did I know that our discussions in Holland and our discussion in Israel and  her
own need for more  made her, one day, get up and come to Israel!  So here was a
What year
what?
Around which year?
When, what she really come? Eh  it probably was  the latest fifties or the earliest sixties. I don't
rememb, do not quite remember. Eh and I can look it, I, I know the, of course I can look it up
Just an indication
She's go, ja, eh, eh, late fifties, earliest six, sixties. And eh, she c, of course came to us, to
me and, of to my, my adopting parents Oudkerk, in Nahariya, and eh she was there, oh, close to half
a year I think, with us, eh, and she joined my friends, circle of friends, they were wonderful friends
and eh, we did what everybody does normally, in, I don't remember if she helped in the h, in, in,
in the household or anything, because I was still, either I was in school or I was already at the eh,
at the university, I don't remember. Eh, anyway, she eh,  decided to go to an Ulpan
Hmhm
to study Hebrew and she did and she went to one of these eh, eh, eh, Hebrew studying
courses in a Kibbutz, in HaShofet, not too far from Haifa and there she met her
future husband and she married and she forgot all about  the Lord
Not the Lord
well not, that Lord, I mean that Lord, that non
[laughs]
that, that secondary Lord. And eh learned from her husband, who was Suddo, religious,
he was religious, he was a, a, he was also a student at the Ulpan, he came from England,
from London, and they married and had three children and lived eh not ever, not hap,
happily, but not ever after, because she died in the young, at a young age.  And eh
which I always say is 'bloed kruipt waar het niet gaan kan' [cries]
Blood goes where
Well, blood is thicker than water
Blood is thicker than water
Is what the b, what they say in English
Exactly
Ja, ja.
Now  how large was this Oudekerk fami, Oudkerk
Zero. One child.  No more children.
You
Me.
You were the only child?
Yep. They wanted al, eh, eh, also my sister, but they did not have children themselves
That wasn't clear
Wasn't clear, well, okay, that was it, that was it. Eh they had, they had wanted to have children
and this has  interesting repercussions eh  they were b, so busy trying to get my sister and busy,
really means busy, court cases and discussions and who knows what, travel, all that sort of stuff.
Eh, that I think at the p, sudden time they decided eh I think that they eh  eh, had no children and
probably today could have had children without any difficulty, but me being there eh and the possibility
being there that eh my sister would also come there, they would have two, they eh kind of decided not
to have any more children of their own. And eh, so that was the family. Period.
Did they create real parental relations?
Yeah, yeah, yes. Eh, eh, yes, even though there it later, later turned out,
which I had not defined, but had obviously felt, that my adopting mother was
kind of envious of not having eh child, child, children of her own.
Hmhm
But not only for a young child like myself or a young boy or a somewhat older boy, was it very
traumatic, it was just as traumatic for them. They had lost their whole family [emotional]
Hmhm
they had been eh hidden with different families in Amsterdam, was very difficult, they eh
went through the Hungerwinter, eh  didn't know what were, how, there were these awful
dangers that you picked up and then you're do, you, you done with, eh, you get sent to
the camps or you get shot right away, eh, eh  eh, people were very traumatized.
And how did the child
By what I now see, and also for, for some time [emotional] as
the inability of the mother to really be a full mother.
Keeping distance?
Well, that may well be a Dutch custom anyway. No? Okay. [laughs] No, it isn't. [laughs] Sorry.
Jewish families?
No Jewish absolutely not. [laughs] Okay. Yeah. Well, that certainly was, that certainly was what I
saw.  And keeping distance is a big word and it's hard to interpret to what does this really mean,
but eh, a lack of, eh, what one calls motherly love  was indeed so. Did they not love me? Oh, he certainly
did very much and eh, certainly they did. I was totally considered that, their, their, their child,
no doubt. Eh but eh it never worked as it would have worked with my own mother.
Sure
It didn't. Now, that is not always so. Is not always so.  Eh, it's not eh, not necessarily eh,
it, this is not a neces, necessary result, but this was it. This is what so, what's so, and I've
come to those conclusions way, way later in my life.  Eh  okay, so I was in Israel, eh, my sister
was in Israel, eh, married now and I went eh, after my eh high school, I had to go the army, but I,
that was a choice to go and study before the army and I was eh very technically inclined, so they
liked me eh to go to a eh  it's called Atudah, to a eh, it used to be called Atudah, where I could
first go to the, to, to study and then go and serve in the army. Eh my compulsory service and, so
I went to the Technion, was accepted and went to the Technion and became an electrical engineer, electrical
engineer.  After which they, the army we could, they of course got me and, and I was in the army for
three years and worked in my profession basically, not that I didn't see any war or stuff or who
knows what, but that was basically, that was my, my function.
And eh  eh, that was very good for me.  Up till today  in America, I meet, of course friends and parents
and grand parents, whatever, of young people who are kind of lost in their purpose in their lives.
Often their parents are well-to-do, many doctors and professors and you name it, and also non-doctors,
but many. And eh they still make very good money and their children have been eh, eh raised on a silver
platter, they never had to do anything and they're lost in, in, eh purpose. They don't really know
what to do, what they should do with their lives. And I have many example, I know many examples of
that sort. I mean, maybe I have even a dozen.  And eh  I always tell them, let them go to Israel and
do something that's not so easy, that will build them.  And some of them fi, indeed have done that
and find their way into the army, which is  not always fun, which
yes
is an understatement. What's that?
It's a tough job
It's often a very tough job, specially, especially in the last ten, ten fifteen years. And eh, but
it does build the person. It isn't more dangerous than walking the streets of the city. If you look
at numbers. It is not. Eh so, but people are afraid. Oh, in the army, you know, there are guns there,
bullets there, it's , sure, people that kill, but people die on the street just the same.
Would you mind very much if I take you back
I don't mind at all!
Eh, I want you to talk about your life, but you go
Right
too  fast sometimes
Yes
Or you want to break for a moment?
No, it doesn't make any difference.  Where would you like to go?
[coughs]. At some stage, you realized your mother was not going to come back
Ah!
and at some stage you got it confirmed
That's a very interesting question, which I was I actually asked by the judge! Two days ago.
yes
And this is a [emotional]  eh, very emotional question.
Sorry
No, no, it's fine. [cries] Can I have some tissues  Nobody ever, ever, told me in matter
of fact  that my family  immediate family and larder, larger family, had been murdered or
killed or whatever in the war! And just as I probably may not have been  ready or able to
stand that news, they weren't able  to stand or capable of delivering the news.
Or even get it
Or even get it. But it became very clear, eh, ja, in the late ni, late forties when I, when I went
to Israel and all that, and did I ever ask myself that specific question: well, gee, will they never
come back? I probably didn't. And you must have heard this  many times [emotional]
Yes
that I hoped way into my twenties [cries] that there was a mistake and somebody would come back.
Maybe not into my late twenties, but maybe possibly early twenties. It's something you, you
hang on to. And  it was obvious, I was inheriting my parents.  There were always lawyers working
on the numbers and lawyers that pr, the, the, the property of the family, excuse me [blows nose]
and it was very simple, as simple as two plus two makes four. For me to decide that listen you
are in, with your sister you are inheriting the whole family, okay, all these lawyers send you
all these papers, that numbers, and you get some money in the bank
It was obvious from all those papers you
as simple as two plus two.  Eh  and one still hopes.
Yes
Which probably is  I'm sure  specially after meeting some of the people the last three days here,
that they think had have gone through, and still have thoughts and  trauma's of that period. Which
are identical to mine's. I think it's just about a, eh syndrome that doesn't differ among people.
Some of, some of us can tell these stories totally dry,  a little red, eh, but it just [emotional]
goes the other, the same way. There was this eh, what's his name, Rudie, eh
Cortissos
You know, the one with the letter.
Cor, Cortissos, he is like my brother. I was sitting next to him in court, we sat next one to the other
and our reactions, and our ways of use, our ways of using eh fun to  for ourselves, cover up things
that are totally obvious to us, are so similar! It's, looks like he's me! And he's
We'll talk about
he says the same.
We'll talk about what happened those days
Good
a little later, is that
Good, sure
Because I would like to continue with your life story
Sure!
This is what I
Sure
No, no, the point, the point, eh, the point I want, I would like to make, the
point I'm making, in, in getting there, in, in, in  is that I think most
of the people I've met [emotional] eh go through the same cycles.
Sure
And you should know by now, and you do
I know
[grins]
Sorry, I know
[laughs] and I, I also infer that you do
is very normal [laughs]
Yeah
But
So anyway
but whatever you can read about life cycles and trauma, it's very normal
Right.  So eh
But then there was a moment
Yeah, actually this is an important point in my life, an important, important eh, di,
eh direction in my life, eh I was very happy, very happy in 1950 as a thirteen year old,
I was Bar- Mitzvah in Amsterdam and then we left. Our eh, our goodbye to whoever w, attended
my Bar- Mitzvah, was the, our, my Bar- Mitzvah was a goodbye party.
Okay.
To my friends, to family, whatever.  And eh, I was very much, very happy to go to, to go to
Israel. There hád to be a break.  And this was a terrific break for me. Not only was life
totally different, you had to relearn eh, you had to basically relearn your life, eh, eh, the
way things were done and school, the new friends, a newer, eh language and many, many other
things. Eh and that change plus the eh, eh  plus the realities of life  that early Israel,
I mean, f, forties, fifties. Eh, imposed on somebody like myself was very good for me. It really
built me. I don't know how I would have  how I would have developed in Holland without breaking
with this, basically tragic eh  periods of my ow, of my own life.
Just before we go on, I have two questions I really want to ask
Please
you. Eh, you went to a public school
Yes
and the boys were attending your Bar-Mitzvah, were they Jewish, I mean, was
That was, yes
Eh
Jewish, nobody from school
Your friends, were they Jewish or
Eh, not only, but mostly.
Mostly Jewish
Mostly, mostly. Mostly.
Which brings me to the next question. That period is assumed to be so undesignated
that it gave rise to a Dutch birth of migration to aliah to
Yep
Israel
Yep.
Eh, have you ever experienced that?
I experienced only one event.  Which was  highly significant in my own little life.  I
do not remember what it was based on. There were in my, in my public school class, there
were eh, I don't know, three, maybe four eh Jewish eh pupils and of course, that age
I don't even know how many Jewish girls I was with, I was not interested
There were few Jewish children of your age
There were very few
at all
but there were, there were, I think I was one of three
If there
boys
were your neighborhood [grins]
Yes, I know, it's not quite eh, eh, eh, I w, I rode my bike every morning in the
cold to school, because my school wasn't there. My school was in, in Zuid.
Yes
My school actually was very close to the eh, eh, Jacob Obrechtschool, straat,
I forget what the name of the school was, but it was there. And why they chose,
why that was chosen for me I don't remember. Probably for that reason.
When I say neighborhood I talk about a bigger circle around
Yes
and
okay, sure, sure, sure, sure, well, in Oost eh, eh, I don't know if eh, eh, I actually
can't say nothing about it, that, anyway, I was in a school in, in, in the area, generally
of Zuid and there were three Jewish pupils in my school and I knew them of course, and we,
we, eh, eh, eh, communicated and my life, my social life really was Tikwatenoe.
Okay.
Eh, not school. And eh, even though I met, I went to, to, to home, you know, there still was from
twelve to two, there was a, eh, lunch break at school and often I would go, ate my sandwich or whatever
I had and I would, will go with one of the friends, they were always Jewish friends, home and have
something to drink there and, and, and eat my eh sandwich and do maybe a little work and then go
back to the school. I couldn't go back to eh, to Mercatorplein. Which is where we lived.  Eh
ja, I remember one, the, there was, there is one eh in my life very, highly significant and there,
there, some other things on the same level. Highly significant eh events, one in particular, I do
not remember why and how  and what the argument was, eh, but at one point I found myself, find,
found myself in a big fight with some, obviously, because I remember the comment, comments and the
remarks, eh, deeply, anti-Semitic eh friends in the class!
School mates?
School mates
Friends
Friends is not quite the word, but, yes.
Okay
And I eh, eh  I was beaten up  only once.  And I was quite upset and I decided forget it. I took my
bike and I [grins] rode home. [laughs] And my mother, my adopting mother, saw what was going on, this
eh, totally eh, upset boy of eh twelve I probably was, eleven, twelve, I don't know when it exactly,
when it was  and eh, what do you do? Well, when you fall of a ladder  when a window cleaner falls
of a ladder, if he isn't injured, the only way to, to, to save him from this trauma is to get him
up the ladder again. Now and then. And the only thing for me was to write a little note and send me
back to school. So there I went back to school. I give the note to the teacher: where have you been?
Because it was in, in, in recess, in the middle of a, there was no teacher present, and eh he read
the note, and then I don't know what he said, he gave a little speech to the class and that was
it.  But with respect to anti-Semitism  this was a [emotional] sific, significant event in my whole
life.  I then re, re, what is it, eh, decided or, or, or re eh
confirmed
right, then confirmed what I had, I tell you in a moment what that was, what I had decided
long ago, to never let anybody hurt me. Ever. Again.  And my whole life, this has been a significant
beacon in my whole life.  Nobody is going to hit, hurt me again.  And anybody who dares to
do something that is of significance against me, he'll get it back. Anywhere. Just a fist
in his face. Or whatever the situation. I just won't take it. But there is more to this.
It didn't hap, it didn't start with eh that class in a public school in Amsterdam.  Eh
I had received for my, I think fourth birthday, from a neighbor in Breda one of those books,
it's a long, eh, little children's book with pictures and a story
yes, which you can unfold, yes
That's right, like a harmonic. I still have it.
Harm, harmo
Like a har
Harmonybook
I don't know, it, it's, it's, it's one, one big, one big piece of eh soft cardboard
and there are pictures and you go one or the other and the other side then you read it.
And it was eh a little, little story about Henkie Haas.  Here, this is eh,  sixty nine
years later. Now, first of all I have the book, secondly I remember the story. And it
was very consequential in my life. Has been, I can still , I can say that it still is,
I have it on my bookshelf. In my bedroom at home! In San Diego.
Aha
It tells the story about Henkie Haas, who is a rabbit and he was quietly floating on a little, little
boat, rowboat and he got stuck in the, in the eh  on the side of the, of the, if the ri, quiet river,
it was a beautiful day, the birds were singing, blablabla. And he hit the side, he, he slep, he fell
asleep. And he hit the side of the river, of the canal, whatever. And he got out and apparently  island
and he was attacked. By  imaginary creatures on two feet. It's a story!  And eh, to not eh, eh,
spend to much time on this, eh, more and more of these creatures came and tried to attack him and
they got a hold of him and got him to the chief, to, to the, to, to, to the chief of their tribe,
whatever, of these funny little yellow creatures and eh, they talked to him and he didn't take it
and he fought and he got rid of them all, he defended himself, he attacked them, he got back to the
little boat and he, eh sail off.  That was to me an example then. Because I knew what was happening.
And I took this little book with me to Bergen op Zoom. It was one of the few things I could take with
me. And I wrote on it my new name, under which I was hidden in Bergen op Zoom. I still have it. That
nobody would  play any tricks on me. Whatever. And those are two examples of the same. Nobody will
hurt me, because I'm going to give them hell.  And it started there with that little children's
book, that little children's, little
In the middle of the war
In the, yes, in the war. And it guided me through that whole period, no doubt about it. Of course,
if there, something had happened,  be taken by the Gestapo or whoever, the police, I would have had
obviously no f, no, no eh, eh ability to resist any, any of this sort, but for myself, eh, this was
eh, and has guided me my whole life. And that was the second event that happened to me. Nothing of
that sort has ever happened to me again. When, they get it back, let's put it that way. [grins]
Including in academia [grins]. They just get it back. Don't fool with me.
Did your foster parents  discuss the reason why they wanted to go to Israel?
I knew, I knew. I was being educated at Tikwatenoe,  here in Amsterdam, eh, and eh, eh, they had friends
and they have groups of friends with whom they discussed this, so I wa, when they went to, to, to, to,
for tea or coffee or whatever in the evening to discuss these things, I heard here and there. Of course.
You have your ears open, eh, children hear, and eh, they, these people had children so you t, talked
about it. It was, it was eh, highly focused and clear cut. And I wanted it myself too.
But it was positive?
Highly positive.
Not negative troubles?
Oh no! No, not at that time. No. Even though I heard at that time eh, eh, I remember
from whom exactly, eh, eh, that, eh, the Jews in Holland have no pe, future.
Hmhm
After that eh, and I told you before, I, I actually I am not so sure that it was wrong. Up till
today. but that's, that's a, that's a, eh, eh, eh, negative statement eh about Judaism
in Holland. And indeed, even today many Jews cou, in Holland go to Israel or America or Australia,
New Zealand or whatever.  And I hope that this is, that I'm, that that statement was wrong
and that what I say now is wrong and that eh the Jewish community in Holland and in Germany and
in everywhere will thrive again. It may take 200 years, I hope it will, it's not going to be
soon, no way. No way!  And eh, anyway, this, this gives you a note eh, eh, eh, an idea of, gives
the tape, whatever, in solid state maybe, an idea of eh  what little, small events in one's
life end in big events in one's life, eh, how they channel wha, channel, have channeled me,
taught me, into what and who and where I am. Quite actually, quite interesting to think of that
for myself, looking from the outside onto myself.
So, after high school I went to the, direct, I, I should have gone to the army but instead I went
to university. I got a, a degree in electrical engineering and I went to the army. I worked in the
army and that's not particularly significant in, eh, except, yes I did my best eh, but eh, eh
when I left the army, eh I was now married, eh, I married while I was in the army and I settled
in, we settled in Jerusalem, where I got a job at the Hebrew University in the medical school.
As an engineer to work on eh engineering projects in medicine and biology. And I liked that a lot,
this was certainly a revelation for, for, at, certainly at that time, we are talking nineteen fif,
nineteen  sixty two/three, eh  eh, engineers eh didn't know anything about biology and medicine,
eh and eh, eh, however, and, and hence I didn't know anything until I went to work there and I
found out that there were very interesting things eh, eh, aspects to working in that and I decided,
I know no medicine, I know no biology, I have to know more and I applied to get a masters now after
my engineering in what used to be called biophysics or medical physics. And I was accepted to the
University of California in Berkeley to do that.
Nice place!
Nice place. And very good, it was a group at the time, now it's a department, eh, I went there
and eh, started my studies, we went there, my wife at the time had eh started the university, microbiology,
and she finished her degree in Berkeley, did the Masters in microbiology and I started to work on
the PhD in biophysics as it was called. And that was a very interesting department because it tried
to unite eh, or to teach the stu, the chemist, chemists physics and, and, and, and biomedicine and
doctors chemistry and physics and the physicists chemistry and eh, and biomedicine. So they tried
to make these fields all in one and I was an engineer, eh, quote physicist and eh I would come in
and learned  chemistry and eh biomedicine and all, all kinds of aspects that are related to that.
Within one semester I saw the light, I dropped everything and restarted biology. Start to [grins]
courses in basic biology and genetics and human  biogenics
If you say we, you and your wife?
Yes, yes, we were there together. Right. And so eh, being now 27, 28, you, you know what is
important and what isn't and you can eh push off the stuff that appears irrelevant and so
it took me 3Â½ years to get my PhD in biophysics, but did I do biophysics? I get, my thesis
was in pure biology. Eh  eh, never mind what the f, what the thesis was like, if you really
want to know you can look it up on the Web, but it's not interested, not interesting.
How did you meet your wife?
I'm, oh, interesting! I met my wife eh when a common friend  a girl, a young woman, eh, eh brought
back a book she had borrowed from me in Nahariya and she had taken a friend of hers who was eh just out
of the army eh on, on vacation, on, on leave eh, I mean, I have to return a book to this guy and eh,
come with me.  And there she was and it was klapt in handen then and there. It took a year, we were married.
Poor young woman friend of mine, it's quite clear that shé was interested and I wasn't and here
I went and married her, one of her best friends. But these things happen in life.
Sure. It's normal
That's what, that's how me, met, met, met my wife.
Had, had you met many girls before, I mean
Oh yeah! I was eh
You were interested?
Eh quite so, quite so.
[laughs]
In fact, I had a, these are not relevant stories, but, I had a girlfriend
you
Oh, okay, I had a girlfriend in eh, in eh, for, for  two, three years, long time, at least three,
2Â½ years in high school. And everybody of, each of our friends knew that this is a couple. Except
when high school was over, we were over. [laughs] So, ah, yes, I had eh many girlfriends. Eh, and,
many steady friends and eh, anyway, we were married and eh, eh, then I got a job in Jerusalem and
I worked there, went to Berkeley, we went together to Berkeley and we both studied there and eh I
got a PhD  and eh, before you get your PhD you want to know what I go, what am I going to do after
that? And I went to visit some acquaintances, some friends at Stanford.  And the acquaintances at
Stanford, the friends at Stanford, I give it, I gave a talk there as a, as a graduating PhD student,
where I had a thesis so I had a, something to talk about, I gave a talk there and the students, the
post-docs told me there is only one lab where you want to go, and we are talking about 1969 , eh,
you only want to go to the greatest and that's Renato Dulbecco at the Salk Institute in La Jolla
California, San Diego.  And I, one, oh ja, at the same time, this same man came to give a seminar
at Berkeley and it was  eh, Stanley Wunwony, and I saw the man, Renato Dulbecco, he was a famous
scientist, biology scientist in, at the Salk Institute.
He had come from Italy in eh, eh  after the war? Yes, after, eh, yes, after the war. Or maybe,
maybe, I don't know, I actually don't know when he came to Coltec, anyway, eh and eh, when
he was giving his talk, or after he was  I walked up to him and I said, well gee,  eh Doctor
Dulbecco, blablabla, I would like to in, inquire if I can maybe c, get a post-doc when I graduate
here. He says, oh yeah, yeah, come to me and we'll talk. So a couple of weeks later I eh flew
to San Diego and went to talk to this professor,  Dulbecco and eh I was the last post-doc he
was accepting for the next year. But if you're the last, you're in!
It doesn't matter [laughs]
Exactly.
If you are the last or the first
Exactly!
in
I was on his list on the wall and that was it. And I did a P, I did a post-doc there, again in a different
field, I mean, I went for engineering to what basically was microbiology or, not to m, microbiology,
from there to eh viral work, cancer, viral cancer at the time was 'hot' and eh, I was there for
2Â½ years and here comes an interesting eh side, side eh, eh, side story, eh I met there, right after
I came  eh a very famous eh  very special eh German woman who at the time was the right hand of Dolbecko
but had never had any eh, eh appointment herself, her name was Margaret Vogt
Hm
Eh, any biologist eh, unless he is eh 20 or 22 know, knew her at the time, a very accomplished
scientist and eh we got to like each other or  had the similar outlook and I worked 2Â½ years
with her on the post-doc. On, on, on work which we published of course. And eh we became friends
for life. And eh, eh and she will men, she will, she will be part of my life in a moment quite
a bit more. When I finished my post-doc, we now had two children, one was born early in Berkeley
and the other was, were born late in Berkeley, one is born in San Francisco and the other in
Oakland and we went back to Israel. I got a position at the Weizmann Institute in Drachoa.
And I went there and eh stayed there for close to ten years, working, at the end eh, they, I
was accepted there in the early seventies, '72, at a time when eh as a result of the Six Day
War in '67, there was tremendous blooming in the country.
Hmhm
And they accepted eh many dozens of young faculty, at the Weizmann
and when time came up, eight years later, or seven, eight years later to give them tenure? they had
in the year I was supposed to get tenure , there were 27 of us, and they could accept one or two.
So I was one of two, of two dozen who had to find employment elsewhere and I wasn't going to go
to, to, to second class institutions, so my friend in San Diego, my Margaret Vogt eh, my mentor and
friend, colleague eh, with whom I had, had contact because I had been back there on a sabbatical too,
eh, told me eh come here, we'll find a place of some sort. So I went back there and worked with
her, the third time, for another year or two and then I looked for a position and got a position at
the University of California, San Diego. Where I have been ever since.  Eh, we now had a third child
and eh, my wife worked and I worked as a eh young faculty now at the University of California and
eh, I knew from eh years prior, many, many people, friends and colleagues and what have you, and I
was established there completely,  ever since nineteen, well basically eh, eh '87 when I eh, or,
still from my post-doc in the earliest seventies and eh '87 when I was on a sabbatical. There are
many, many top  institutions there and I knew almost everybody eh, as things go and I've been there
ever since. Been teaching and doing research and I've switched fields time and again, eh, which
I, eh suggest everybody do. Some people, when they retire, they still do what they did as a eh, as
a st, as a, as a doctoral student and I have changed, I don't know, half a dozen times. And eh have
enjoyed the process greatly, various aspects of it, knowing something in science nobody else knows,
is some of the most precious information there is and then publishing it of course and eh, and things
like that, what it, it's very sweet to the, to the scientific ego. So I love the scientific process,
I love the students, I've t, taught many, many students, both in large classes and, and PhD students.
So eh, a typical boring academic.
Happy
Happy, oh yeah. Oh yeah. And eh, and that really has been the beacon in my, in much of my life eh, I
mean, we're talking ever since eh, eh, Berkeley's in 1990, eh, '64, now I can't count it, it's
about fifty years right? Okay. So, for fifty years I have had a, a clear light, a clear star there,
that's what I'm doing. And that's what I've been doing. And eh, so I have many colleague friends
and non-colleague friends and eh, we're involved, to some degree in the Jewish community and, eh,
it's good! It's a great place, eh, the, the university or the academic community all together in
many institutions, not just the university, eh, has grown like a mushroom in quality, also in, in size,
but in quality, unbelievable. Unbelievable. I mean, I can even see it, it's a, it is as if I have
seen evolution, human evolution occur. Of course it's not evolution I see, I just see that better
students are being accepted, but eh, in the la, in the, in the thirty years that I've been there,
I have seen the quality of the students increase, eh, constantly to the effect that eh, I now have some
undergraduate students in my lab, who are better than the PhD students of twenty years ago. Unbelievable.
And that's a great, great joy. We talked about this at  Eh, I now eh, I have, I am actually officially
retired, which is totally, eh, meaningless because I still have the same lab and the same students and
the same office and I do the same from early till late, but someday soon, especially since I want to
write a book about this subject [grins], my eight lives, [grins], that I will, I will quit and eh, eh,
to, to a large degree. Not totally and eh start doing something else, eh, again, yet again. Eh I have
three children. My daughter who was born in Berkeley, eh and got, it's very interesting with respect
to how people grow up, eh, she got, she's a lovely, was, was a lovely baby bo, baby girl, all girl,
little young girl, she got all my attention. And the attention of my colleagues and friends and what
have you, always at the university. First at, first at the Salk Institute, and then at the Weizmann
Institute where she grew like a mushroom or like a rose, eh, she eh, when she finished high school,
back and forth in this case in, in, in, in, in San Diego, she went to Harvard, from Harvard she went
to eh the University of California at San Francisco, she got her MD degree, she had done lots of, lots
of eh, eh, research at Harvard and at UCSF and eh, she now is food professor eh at the UCSF which is
roughly like eh going to Tübingen for, or Heidelberg for physics. I mean it's number, numero uno.
Eh and she's numero uno, she is a physician and a researcher, has her own lab and it's great and,
at the same time she's married also to a physician, eh, eh, he's a pathologist and he also has a
lab and clinical, eh, responsibilities so as far as it's seen from, from the academic eh, eh, di,
eh, direction nothing could have happened better in this respect. Eh, she has three children. The oldest,
Jonathan, is nineteen, is in his second year of eh undergraduate studied, studied at Harvard. Number
two, is just as good and will probably go to Harvard, we don't know quite how to pay for it, but,
eh
It's really expensive, yes
Oh, it's unbelievable [grins] but number two and number three is even better. So  it's great.
Yeah and my second son, my second child, is a son, Daniel,
the interview halts for 1 minute
he did a PhD in mathematics, pure mathematics at the
University of Michigan, which is again the Mecca, one of the Mecca's of mathematics eh, the other
best one is eh, well, the other good place is, but, is Moscow, I mean, math in Moscow is, eh, is synonymous
and there are many Russian professors and mathematicians in, in eh, Ann Arbor Michigan, University
of Michigan. He did PhD there, he then went to work for a large, I mean large space company in Pasadena,
near California and he's been, been there ever since. And he's doing very well and eh  eh, is
very, is, is very happy at it. Eh, I have no idea what he does, I can't even understand the language
they use, I can't even read the books they, they, they, they, they study from. Eh, it's a totally,
the, there are, you know, multiple languages which they  my eh baby son, Ariel is eh, eh, is early
thirties, he became a high school eh science teacher and he found a job in a wonderful school, not
far from where I live, eh, we live, and eh, he's married, has one child, so that's grandchild
number four and in fact  in a moment some other things, side issues, a year and a half ago, in the
summer of '08 I took my daughter and her, three grandchildren, and my wife and some others eh, because
the wife I have here, Jo is my second wife, tell you in a moment about that, eh, to Holland. We were
going to see where eh, eh, daddy, or grand daddy comes from. And we toured the whole country etcetera,
and we went among others to Breda. And in Breda is a very interesting situation, in that, sure there
is minute Jewish community but there is a beautiful cemetery. Jewish cemetery. In the woods, a wall
around it, gorgeous. And my whole family is buried there, except up till 1940.-
Sure
After 1940 nobody is go, nobody is, have, of course has been buried there from
my family, or very few people anyway. And they and/or the city or one of the ministries,
I'm not sure who all contributed, have put up a memorial there.
Hm
Of the people who didn't come back from the Shoah. Of the city of Breda and, and environments.
And it's kind of a, a, a, a shiny eh, eh, eh, memorial standing there with all the names and
dates of, whether it's a birth and date of eh death. And there are many, many, many Haas, Haas,
Haas, Haas, Haas, Sobibor, Sobibor, Sobibor, Sobibor.  And my daughter, I was, stood at the graves,
gravestones, and I didn't see when she did it, my daughter, eh, took her three kids [emotional]
put them in front of the memorial and took a picture of the memorial.
Hmhm
And her three kids reflect in the memorial.  It's an unbelievable picture. But that's my life.
Yes.
Everybody appreciates it [emotional] but it's very, very interesting. And in fact, when we talk
about this a little later eh I will come back for various parts of this, the trial and they absolutely
want to come. They won't let me go without [emotional], will not, they want to come.  So it says
a lot of positive and there is, ja, significant trauma that has come through.
That's the question I wanted to ask for. All those happy years, what happened with the other side?
Eh I am quite good  eh, rejecting it.  Avoiding it. And the word is avoidance.
I do not go on trips to concentration camps or anything of the sort.
Why should you?
Why should I? Yes. I know m, more than I care for. Eh and in doing that I can eh keep it away.
Hm
Because J, I think very significantly, and I'm now looking outside on myself, knowing myself of course.
I'm not really eh, eh objective in this, because it's me. Nevertheless I can kind of look outside,
from the outside in, in, onto myself. And  only the last few years  have I found out, and it's only
a few years and it's mostly due to my wife Jo  that I have for  sixty five years, had an undertone
of post traumatic stress syndrome.  And I rejected and I don't like to, to eh,  acknowledge it, for
myself, but there are, there have been uncontrollable, and not, noisy, who knows what eh, of any sort,
but uncontrollable minor, or major, health issues that results from that, result from that. I've had
very strange phenomena that I have never been able to understand, eh, since I was a teenager. And it
occurs every year or two or three and whatever. And I know when it happens.
Hm
And all I can do is cure myself by going to sleep.
Because no doctor, nothing is wrong with you, what are you talking about?
In fact, recently  I have come to the conclusion, well, in fact, my wife
found on the Web  stress syndromes in Holocaust survivors.
Absolute
And she found in me, and I find in me, exactly those things [emotional].
Hmhm
Eh, has it, has it cost me any eh serious problems in my w, in my life? I just told you eh, pretty
successful eh life, with respect to family and children and eh, and academics and whatever, things
I like to do, it hasn't. It hasn't. I can really eh, eh, eh, eh, overcome it. But there is
deep down inside [emotional] something that cannot  and it's the first time that I  have embezzled
that I understand  when soldiers coming back from Vietnam, in the United States,  from, from Iraq,
but also in Vietnam, but it's too late, too old, too old, and they say they suffer from something.
And no doctor can find anything.  Not even psychologically.  That they're overcome by hindrances
that have the strangest physical repercussions, strangest of, that cannot be explained by medicine.
Nor even by psychology or psychiatry or whatever. Unexplained. And that's a syndrome. And only
in the last few years can I understand it!
That you have to admit there is something
That there is what?
Something
Yeah, eh, no doubt, exactly. Exactly. And it's typical and it is, and eh, eh, and
I think that if you're strong you can, you can circumvent it and eh  and, and
Strong?
and, and avoid it, let's put it that way.
At one stage your marriage ended, ended?
Yeah. Then in the eh, oh, in the early sixties, sixties? No, no, no, what am I talking
about, nonsense, nineties.
the interview halts for 2 minutes
and starts again at 128 minutes
and starts again at 02:08
I had my community and my friends and everything, children. And I continued teaching and
research what have you and then eh, in one way or the other, I found eh, eh, it clicked with
this young woman who had lost her, her husband many years earlier, eh to, to cancer and eh
we became close and we married. And it's been a success story.
Wonderful
But the, the, eh  I'm quite sure that this was, that the, eh, eh and, and one asks one self, gee,
why did you do this? Why did you loose, leas, eh leave your wife? Who was the mother of your three children.
No kidding. It's not a simple thing. And the reason was, it was unbearable. It was just unbearable.
And, added to that fact is that she refused to see that there was a problem and she refused to see any
sort of professional help, which I have my doubts if that exists at all. If it can be helped. Maybe
it can. Hopefully  and I'm probably wrong in this, but I have some opinions
Is she still alive?
Oh yes!
Oh
Alive and, actually alive and well. Alive and well. But
I have never been sorry that I did it. [grins] In fact
You want to live, you want to live
Yeah, exactly. That's indeed for, indeed the point.
And if you feel you can't live you,
Couldn't
Have to,
couldn't live, because it was
Yeah. And I've solved
Eh
And I solved it
You had survived already
I had survived already. And in fact  that word [emotional]
is a leitmotif in my whole life.  Absolutely
Sorry. I made a mistake, this is an interpretation of
you [laughs] that I'm not allowed to make that
Well,  say anything you want
No, but it's not professional [laughs]
[laughs]
I'm sorry, I apologize
Perfectly fine, for me it's perfectly fine eh, you are
the professional side here, I'm just a person.
Yeahhhh
So
I'm also human
Yeah, sure.
This kind of work never is only professional and academic, it's impossible
and we have to acknowledge that  there are ways of dealing with academia
and science which are not suited for certain stories
When one looks at some, at, at, at someone's life, you looking at me, and I'm looking at myself
telling the story, eh  many of the effects on us  whether it's living in a small town as a, as a eh,
eh, eh very o, organized person or going through many, many eh, eh difficulties as I have, eh there
are very many interacting streams and, and streamings and effect, and ef, causing effects, many. Many.
And some of us survive to the age of 73 or more and some do not. But it's all very, always very complex,
which of course is the problem of psychologists with p, with their patients.
Are you eh, still active, eh  how shall I phrase this? I assumed your second wife is not Jewish ?
She's not Jewish , but she's more Jewish than most of the people around us. [laughs]
She became Jewish
No, she doesn't become Jewish , because she couldn't do that to her f, to her parents.
Because you said
And I can understand it.
you said you
She, her whole outlook, her all, whole philosophy and all of that, in all
of these, she's more Jewish than many Jewish people I see, I know
you're loosing
The, by doing
No, no, no, no, that's fine, but you were pulling at it
Oh, yeah, I'm try, I am, on the contrary I'm trying to make sure, yeah okay, okay.
Fine
Eh, so she's, no she's as such is not Jewish. She has two children who are not Jewish and it
would be eh, she thinks, she thought, eh kind of forced for her to be Jewish and then not be eh,
eh, if you wish available to her children. Even though she, she claims she has no religion, which
is what we saw, eh, eh, she doesn't believe in anything unless it can be klapt touched or proven
eh [laughs] and eh, which is basically my position as well. And eh, and so we manage very, very,
very well, so f, so, philosophically or, or, or culturally, or, or sociologically, or, or social-economically
we see very, very, very much eye to eye. And she participates with me eh, eh, many, not all, many
of our friends are Jewish and eh, and we go to eh, I mean the person who, who drags me to the Jewish
Film Festivals in eh San Diego, who has a big one every year in February, eh, is more she than
the, than I do, and things of that nature.
Hm
So eh  eh  we have a warm home, we have a Jewish home, we have a, a, eh, eh
And you were one, at one stage, you said, there was this Madam De Vogt who became
Oh yeah
more important to your life
Oh boy!
I'm sorry for my memory
Oh boy! Thank you for remembering.  This is a side story, has, to some degree nothing to do with
me or my family, anything like that. Even though she was so closely involved that, it almost, she
is almost family as such. She is one of two daughters of a very famous German scientist
You said so yes
Oskar Vogt.
Aha
He was a psychiatrist  eh who was the head of the Kaiser Wilhelm, later
called Max Planck Institute, for eh  brain research in Berlin-Buch
Okay
Northern Berlin.  Eh, he was a very liberal, we were, they were not Jewish , he was a very liberal
person. He eh became to know, het, an, actually when you think of it,  crazy story, he came to know
the eh, eh, all the big guys, or many of the big guys, quote, unquote, of Germany in German industry,
in German everything. Because he was a, he went to work to make some money as a psychiatrist  in the
Spa's of southern Germany and, there you go. And all these people came. To be treated.
They also needed help [laughs]
They also, they all needed help, yeah. Okay.
Sorry about laughing
And he,
Yeah of course, of course and he made many, many, many, friends and he cured the matron of, and
here comes something interesting, of the Krupp family, the matron, the mother. And I'm not sure
how long this goes back. We are talking probably about, eh, she was born in 1850 or 1830, I don't
know, and we are talking about, about the, the, the, the, the 1910's or 20's
Yes
10's. And he cured her! of eh mental illness. Or whatever it was. Depression, I'm
not sure what it was. Never investigated it further. And of course he was the darling
of the company. Of the, of the family. And the family had some ability  and the following
happened.  Eh, he eh was now the head of the, well, before that, in the '20's, early
'20's he's the man who analyzed, totally, the brain of Lenin.
Yes [grins]
Okay?
bizar, I'm sorry [laughs]
Because what?
Krupp, Lenin, [laughs]
Well, yeah, here we go! And he went, and he, they asked him to
establish an institute of brain research in Russia and he did
Yes
the institute that exists today in Russia
are his doing, of course he's gone, he, he died in the '50's, and he had two daughters.
The bottom line is, this is a long, long, long story and I won't make it for the, all that
long, he eh was kicked out by Hitler from the chairmanship in 1935-ish of the eh Max Planck
Institute, eh, or the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute for brain research in Berlin-Buch. Hitler didn't
want him anymore, he was kicked out, but Krupp paid to es, eh millions, to establish a private
institution to continue this work in eh, near Freiburg. In the Black
Yes?
Forest
Okay
Near Freiburg, in Germany.
Sure
And it was a big institution, several large buildings and there, with Krupp's money  he constantly
imported, or had come German Jews, or Russian Jewish scientists, or Czech Jewish scientists,
or whoever, who went through there and found there other ways to disappear.
Hmhm
With Krupp's money!  The Nazi's tried to suppress him, to kill him, to, but
send him to the concentration camps and I don't know this for sure, but quite
possibly he picked up the phone to Krupp, one of the Krupp brothers, and they picked
up the phone to Hitler and said, Herr Hitler, no! Leave Vogt alone.
Okay
And he was left alone to do his scientific work, that
family, in the Black Forest all through the war!
And he was Jewish?
No!
Okay.
But he saved many Jews. After the war, just like there wasn't really a future for,
I think for Jews in Holland, there was no f, future for liberal people in Germany.
Exactly
And she left for, or was invited, in fact  unbelievable, p, absolutely unbelievable, during
the war years, being separated from a, the scientific community, she pa, she, the, Margaret,
she was a young girl then, eh, say in her twenties, a young woman, published 39 papers in drosophila
genetics. That were leader, leading papers in the field. In obscure German publications. Published
on yellow browning paper. Which are available only, eh, I have them all, but available only
in a few universities because how far was the, were, were scientific papers on drosophila genetics
send to universities during the Second World War? Well she, by herself, well, there was some
help of some scientists who came in, geneticists, published 29 papers. And this was known to
the Fage Group, which is a well-known concept of mostly, among others, German scientists, who
were working at Koltec in Pasadena, California.
Hm
The two  groups who really developed eh, DNA biology or structure of DNA and it's  etcetera,
were the Pasteur Institute in, P, Paris and in Pasadena, California. There were  many others that
were pretty good, but they were the top. They invited her over. She came over and started to work
at Koltec and then eh, eh, eh, started to work with Dulbecco, who was my mentor later, and they
went and started the Salk Institute with Jonas Salk. Who was the eh developer of the Salk vaccine.
And eh, of the first Salk vaccine. And eh, highly intelligent woman with whom I have worked. Eh
on and on, never off since eh, since I came there as a, as a post-doc eh in, at, at the Salk in
nineteen eh, eh 69.  She died several years ago, I was basically her son and I choose her as my
scientific mother, this is my fourth mother or something like that.
A Doctor Mother
Yeah I think [grins] but, again, again, just like the, the case eh I tell, I tell about eh the, the,
the place where I landed in Nahariya with all these doctor, doctor, doctor, doctors, with all these
highly, highly int, eh intelligent and up to date people, eh, who were part of my, of my teenagers,
she was part of my whole life. I mean, ever since I became a post-doc. And we worked together to, for
many years, we came very close friends. And I was basically her son. Eh, I know many, many, many stories
about her and the family etcetera. Eh very famous, I mean, I still get papers, papers, papers from
Germany sent to me because they knew of the relationship I had with Margaret, eh, eh, about the bio,
the, the, the, eh Max Planck Institute in, in, in, in Berlin-Buch, about the Frankfurt eh collection
of all of her families, eh brain slides which had been collected in Berlin and in eh, in the eh Black
Forest and  eh, so another, another eh  highly, highly intelligent, highly regarded eh scientist or
intellectual in my life eh where I take the second or third, eh third spot. But you cannot but eh be
effected by people of a stature. She became 94, died a couple of years ago, eh gave her, Jo and I gave
her lots of support of course in her last, many, many years, but also her last years and eh, eh  so
one is, when I talk about stories intertwining in ones life, in building a life  it's one of the
stories. Significant stories. And everybody in San Diego, elsewhere knows this and, and eh, so eh,
when they, eh, then there is a memorial for Margaret Vogt so anybody, when they ask me if I want to
participate blablabla, all that sort of stuff.
It's a very particular world, the academical world of
German [coughs] before Nazi's and the alternative
Oh yeah!
German intellectuals?
Oh yes, oh yes! Germany was, and, and then in a moment I'll change my, my, my
verb, obviously was one of these, eh thé intellectual centers of the world.
Yes
Among others due to their highly, highly eh, eh capable Jews, Jewish scientists. And Jewish money
and Jews scien, eh and Jewish everything. Huh, the twenties eh all of cul, not all of, a good
part of culture in Germany of, of, of, of, eh, was, was, was Jewish. After the First World War.
Eh  eh, and in fact here is where I change my verb, eh, Germany has been very much out of my
system for obvious reasons, for many, many years, eh I am here, we're sitting in Munich here,
it's the f, actually the first time I come to Germany  and I only allowed myself to come, and
I am  eh, eh  I agree with myself having come, very much so, not just to the, to the, to the
trial and the aspects of the f, eh, be, being pursued with the Sobibor Foundation, but also eh,
we went for six days to, to Berlin, where we went to the musea and what have you  I sense a major
change in the last half generation only. The last ten, twelve years. In the German attitude
towards us Jews, and towards their past and towards Israel.
Hmhm
Actually, it almost appears, it's not quite so, but it almost appears that the only supporters
that we as Jews, or Israelis as that, for that matter, have today in the world of consequence,
are the Germans.  And what we have noticed here with  the people of the court, I mean, sure
they're eh public servants, including as I see it, the judges and the attorneys,  eh is
evidence of this major change. And it is an extreme position for somebody like me with this
history we just try to record it.  To this sadist now here.
Before we go over to the
Ja
[coughs]
trial
Yeah
I, I keep myself to chronologies,  is there anything you forgot to talk, to tell?
Just think
Not really eh  of any consequence, only, only maybe, maybe some summaries of, of my life. Very personal
unfortunately, eh  I've, I, in fact intend, as I already told you to write a book about my eight
lives, and they're all different. Very different, in many ways. Eh  but eh  one common, as I already
said before, leitmotif is, and I know of instances that I'm not sure if you, you'll ask me immediately
well, tell me an incident, but I'm not sure if I can, eh that surviving , just surviving and then
doing what I, I'm able to do in this world, eh have been a highly significant eh  eh motif in my
life. On different, eh, on, on, on, on, from, from different sides. And this is during army service
and this is eh being careful not to fall into a deep hole, what, whatever you wish to, to, to talk
about. Eh and that is obviously due, due to my past. That's number one. Number two, as I already
quoted, and I just repeat myself now, I'll try to repeat it more interestingly, eh  eh,  this is
where my Israeli education, with army, without army is irrelevant, irrelevant, has been very consequential
to me. In my life.  And it's exactly the little story I told you about this eh Henkie Haas, about
this eh, I just won't let anybody hurt me or us  I will  I will eh work hard, hit hard eh do everything
I can to make sure that we, and I get our rights, that we deserve. And that's really the leitmotif
of my life. Have nothing to do with academia, have nothing to do with learning, have nothing to do
with if I did okay in high school or not, nothing of the sort. But at every point, at every step I
recognize that this has been a very important eh aspect which others who ha, do not have the experience,
experiences that I've been through, may not ever come in, can come to touch or come in, in, in, in,
in contact with. And there are no significant eh, really significant points that I, we haven't managed,
or there are many of, stories, stories, but no, nothing of, to a significance eh beyond that. Eh except
one point.  eh, this is probably the result of my life or the result of my genetics, my inheritance,
whatever. Eh  at this point in my life I ha, the last five, six years, I've been working on prostate
cancer.
Hmhm
Eh, why prostate cancer? Never mind. Eh, I could have chosen breast cancer or something similar. It's
all very much the same. In which eh science and medicine and biomedicine eh  are actually quite unsuccessful.
And there are major questions there that need to be answered and the scientific establishment doesn't
allow, doesn't facilitate people to go through or to, to, to, to research or to come up with new
ideas of what needs to be done. But I've been to many meetings of course and, and, and granting
agencies and what have you, and you see people who eh have prostate cancer and are scared to death
that in six, seven, eight months they'll die. And the same is breast cancer. And others. Eh the
possibility, the opportunity I should use the word, to serve human kind with that sort of work  is
the center of my being. Period. It is, yeah, highly satisfying to a person like myself but it is also
almost a purpose in life, in my life at this point. Eh
It's worth it
It's be, besides the fact that it may well be worth it, worth,
worth it, eh, it is the only way I can express myself.
I understand.  Till now I want to thank you and we will break and then we will continue.
Good. Thank you. Thank you.
Ik wil je vragen, ik wil je vragen Martin, () waarom heb je besloten
mee te doen aan de rol als de groep medeklager, mede, Nebenklägers,
bij het proces Demjanjuk en hoe ben je ermee in contact gekomen?
Ten eerste, in Hollands nu?
Nou je ku, o sorry
We can, we can
Oh I, I want to ask you eh how, how did you decide to join the Nebenklager, how
did you get into contact and what are your motivations? I, I apologize.
I saw a small, a very small, little article online in the Jerusalem Post
[scrapes throat] that eh  eh Houwink, Houwink ten Cate, Houwink
Ten Cate, ja
Ten Cate was organizing something of this nature
Hmhm?
and eh that there would be a, if, if Demjanjuk was to be extradited eh this would happen in Munich,
because the eh, the judiciary here, in, in, in Munich eh in Germany was interested to, to pursue
this case. And it probably took me  eh fifteen milliseconds  to decide that this is for me.
Hmhm
I didn't even think for a moment [scrapes throat]. I had to do this. And one of the main reasons or,
or, eh, arguments that I told myself was how would my, sorry, even though a Nebenkläger can only be
Neben, Nebenkläger according to German law if it is immediate next of kin who was the vic, who was
the actual murder victim [scrapes throat] there are so many people killed of my family in Sobibor and
elsewhere  that to be specific  what would my mother think or have thought and my murdered brother and
my gassed sister? If the only survivor of the immediate family wasn't going to put in  the action,
the effort to go there and, quote, de, defend them or eh recognize them or remember them? And that's
the main reason. It is absolutely right for me to do that [scrapes throat] to do that, to have done
it, and I continue more and in fact I'll come at least probably twice more, I want to hear, be heard,
discuss, etcetera and there are many reasons for that. So that's where I heard it and that's the
main reason I came. It is [scrapes throat] and this is actually, there is some, something more interesting
than that, or more relevant to that and that, for years eh, for example, I, I have, I have eh, kept
myself from doing anything of this nature for many years, when the case was being heard in Israel [scrapes
throat] the Demjanjuk case, I barely, if at all, listened to details of the, of the trial. It didn't
interest me at all. No, I must say I did not know at the time that some of, next of kin of mine, had
been killed in, in eh, in Sobibor.Did not know. Only at the end of the nineties did I ef, did I get
a, a letter from the, the, from the eh Dutch Red Cross stating all these exact details, dates and, and,
and places. I didn't know.  Eh  and in fact they wouldn't, they meaning the Dutch, the Dutch government,
the Dutch eh, the Red Cross, would not voluntarily let me look in, look into the eh, into those sources.
Into those
lists. I had to ask. But I came, the, eh, in the lite, late nineties there was a eh, a call for people
to, to inquire and then they would eh, eh research it and send us a letter with all these details.
That's what I did. So anyway, I didn't know. Eh  and I actually avoided it for a long time, for
all the same reasons of self-preservation. For all of those reasons. In fact, I'm sure you've heard
this many times, and it's on many of the other tapes, eh, of these interviews,  I was to some degree
disgusted with the whole thing. I didn't want to hear of it. Because there was nothing to be done,
it was beastly, it was criminal in the lower, in the lowest form and eh nobody was going to come back,
it wouldn't help anything or anyone. And, I could barely stand it.
Hmhm
But this has changed for two reasons. One: I now know where those murders took
place [scrapes throat], two: I have s, I have seen already for the last eh, eh,
recently few, recently  I think ten, twelve years, especially in the last four,
five, that there has been a significant change in the German attitude
Hmhm
towards the Shoah
eh, in their attitude towards me, in the attitude towards, and I'm not talking about single Germans,
there were always eh fine single Germans, I have some German friends in, in San Diego, which is something
I'll talk to, eh I have to tell you about on tape, but eh  eh the German, current German attitude,
the last dozen years, towards Israel, maybe I repeat myself, towards the Jews and towards eh, eh, the
Shoah, the Holocaust, are of a nature that they are in my eyes not thinking too f, too, too theo, too,
too thoroughly about that, they had, about the only ones who have thoroughly repented  and atoned for
the crimes of their grandparents. I think they have. And in fact, the attitude we have seen during these
days in Munich  is ju, eh, eh, eh, eh, eh, eh, emphasizes that.
Can you explain that?
Yeah. The eh, eh, the people in the court, the eh, people in the hotel, you know many of
them are not German, eh, the people on the street, eh, I've, I, not only do I find no animosity
towards me when I walk in or do whatever I do, I find actually support and the, the, the
eh, the eh, eh people in the court, including the judges, not to talk at all eh about the
eh, the lawyers who of course chose to do this out of conviction, eh, eh they are such a,
eh, breath of fresh wind in a highly negative situation ever since '45
Hm
that how can I allow myself, and I cannot, and I don't want to, to not recognize their effort.
It would be an absolute historical mistake, I think, for us not to go towards them and say yes
we accept your atonement. Do we forget? No! Are we less sad about it because of it? Because of
these atrocities and our own families going down the drain? Or  going eh up in smoke? No! But they
have drawn the conclusions and in fact, the Germans, the current German generation, has drawn the
conclusions, in comparison, many other German gene, eh, eh, I'm sorry, many other perpetrators
of hanes crimes, eh crimes, have not  Take Japan.  The Japanese  eh committed eh if you on, if
one knows a little history,  crimes as hanes as, as, as, as, as the Nazi's, just no doubt about
it, all over this East Asia and China, and the Chinese hate them for all the right reasons, and
they have never been able to atone even in the smallest way publically
Hmhm I know
nor have the Americans atoned for the, eh, eh, destruction of native life in the United States,
nor for terrible repeated crimes against the blacks, whom they imported themselves eh, to become
slaves. Eh  but the Germans have.  Or are clearly in the process. And that including eh, eh, very
sw, eh, very, eh, eh soft spot I have, for obvious reasons, for Israel, and not necessarily for
every policy they pursue, but I have a very spot for, a very soft spot for Israel, and the Germans
are about the only ones who are eh, almost eh unconditionally supportive.
Hmhm
Now it is wrong to be unconditionally supportive, politically
Is that so? [laughs]
Yes, it is. However, eh, eh, they are very supportive. And for all the reasons that I, I imagine
what goes through them when they decide on one other,  decision, however, it shows, it really
shows, clearly, when we visit here, so [scrapes throat] I had to come, there were, was every
possible reason for me to come, I'm happy I came and it was right to come.
So what happened to you those days of the trial? Because we
were together at the first days of the trial Demjanjuk.
You like to hear about Demjanjuk or about the
You
group? Me?
Me or your relation to the other Nebenanklager
Ah! Oh my gosh!
What happened
Oh my gosh! How interes
How interesting
to you?
What happened to me first of all, within the group
Of Nebenkläger huh?
of Nebenkläger, the group of s, eh, eh, of, brought here by the Sobibor Foundation
Yes
eh, is that I saw, hey gee, I'm not alone!  Not only am I not alone, they are all so similar to me
in their past, in their eh, eh, smaller or bigger, bigger traumas, in their reactions to these traumas,
in their, I mean eh, one in par, eh, happened to sit next to him, Rudie, eh [scrapes throat] his eh,
we have, we, we were joking, we were, eh, talking to each other, eh  eh, quietly, politely, eh in the,
eh the, in the, eh court chambers, eh, in the, in the hall, eh, we had comments to each other about
Demjanjuk and about the judge and about the, the, the cour, the, the procedures and what have you, and
we thought so much the same! I thought: he's my brother!  Identical. And I know, of course I talked
eh with him, not, not enough but, eh, that he thought, thought exactly the same. We are so similar I
can't even believe it. But there are many others who have very similar ideas. Few of the people here
were hateful, I don't think many were, if any, I'm not sure. There was no thoughts of revenge against
this old man. After all, is he a criminal? laughs sceptisch You bet he is! And how! And we'll see
if the court proves that to the satis, to its satisfaction. We'll wait and see. I think, he did what
he did, it was actually ju, just about proven in, in, in the cou, in the case in Israel and that's
not, not necessarily relevant. Do I [scrapes throat], did I get eh red in the face and, and, and, and,
and eh, did I eh, eh, did a lot of animosity come up, come up in me when I saw this man? Not at all.
I think he is a pathetic eh, eh, eh, anti-hero. He's nothing! Which is exactly why he did what he
did. If he were a Mensch, even though he was 21 or whatever he was, 22, he would have run away, he wouldn't
have done this. But he is a pathetic, little mouse. I can't even call, call him a rat. A pathetic
nothing. He won't even sit up and look the court, the lawyers or us the Nebenkläger in the eye!
So he in the court, in the case to me has become irrelevant. Yes, he has to be eh punished, but his
punishment will be when it comes, by the hand of the Almighty, he, he'll die. Eh, and he, most probably
will die in jail, there is, b, barely a change that he will get out of this, barely, eh, hardly [scrapes
throat] maybe 10%, you know, eh, eh, the tactical decision by, by his attorney Busch, eh,  so he doesn't
stir me at all. But  the eh Nebenkläger, first of all, they stir me a great deal. Because the majority
of them, and I have talked to many of them, not all, but many of them, in one way or the other during
the interactions in the last three days, eh, they think very much like me, they are quite often, not
always, quite liberal, quite, eh, quite of similar opinions. I don't see any revenge eh, eh, eh, direct,
eh, revenge feelings, nor do I have revenge feelings. I mean, I'd love it if that, if that stretcher
on which he lies in the court room would be underground, but do I care? Not really. So that's the,
that's him. And that's the Nebenkläger with whom I find very much kinship, very much. Even though
I've never met any of them. Eh and it's not because, well it is because they're Dutch and because
they have been through what I've been doing and they, because they're Jews and because eh [scrapes
throat] so many years this has been with every, with each of us and all of us, that there is a lot of
eh, of, of common ground and common understanding. Number three in the, in the, in, in this theatre,
and it is after all, if you look from the outside, a theatre of sorts, and I don't mean this negatively,
eh  eh, is the court.  Before I go to the court, let's go closer to home, that's the, our eh, attorneys.
This is a group of the finest, the finest human beings-
Hmhm
and there are differences between them. But I knew what I was going into, when about six weeks ago, I
had an interview with eh attorney professor Nestler, by s, by eh Skype. I was in front of my laptop,
in my office, in San Diego, and he was at home, in Frankfurt on his desk in his office with his computer.
And we talked for 90 minutes. And I think, I'm quite sure, that he wanted to know who's this guy
coming from San Diego all the way? What is he, what is he after? What is he about? I want to know what
he's about, whom I'm presenting. And I wanted to know, hey, gee, who's going to present me in this
thing? And it took twenty minutes for us to know each other and 90 minutes for us to be very happy with
each other. And my, he hadn't told me that and I haven't told him that either. It's completely
obvious. We understand perfectly. Now, he, with his associate eh lawyers, as the representatives of the,
of the Nebenkläger, eh, eh, I cannot imagine a finer group of people to pre, represent us in a German
court. Number three or four, is the, the court. Eh and there are some others and that's the judges.
seven people, five judges and two associate-judges or maybe they're in, in their latest stages of,
of  I'm not sure. Eh, I sat there to testify  and one of the reasons I did not break down in front
of them was I was close enough to look them all in the eye and they looked me in the eyes. And I have
complete  trust in what I saw. There is just no doubt in my mind that these people are, just as they
should, honestly, fairly, going to treat this trial. And that gave me, at that moment, such a, eh, satisfaction,
mental satisfaction, that I might have wanted, eh, I might have, I might have eh, normally broken down
in front there, and some people did. I didn't. Because I really put my trust in this, in this court.
The last, almost last, two, two others. The defense attorney [grins] is p, is also pathetic. It's a
joke. In 2009 to make the, the, the formal points he's trying to make, and he has to do so, he's
being paid for that, it's his job
Absolutely!
Yeah, but if you look at the, at the arguments, the arguments are, eh, eh, irrelevant. There is no defense
for Demjanjuk in this court. There is no defense for Demjanjuk in this world, by now, we know more than
enough to k, to, to, to state that. And it will take, a formal, half year trial to come to that conclusion.
And most probably that will be the conclusion, not necessarily for sure, but, and that shouldn't be
for sure, it should be a fair trial. Last is the only point in the proceedings in the last three days,
in court, where I became eh, eh, stressed, or not stressed, eh, eh, emotionally involved, is by the reading
of the eh, accusations. By the prosecutor. And not by the facts. Well, yes, also the facts, the way
he structured the, the accusation against Demjanjuk. The facts he mentioned, the dates he mentioned
were all very significant. I w, I didn't expect to hear that. Such a complete eh, eh, eh, re,  of the
facts. But what really got me emotional was who was presenting this. A guy the age of my children. A
very, very young, obviously highly intelligent young lawyer, German, young lawyer who has no connection
to all of these historical events  and that hé was presenting this for us, or in this case, I got emotional.
It was the only thing that really stirred me. Demjanjuk, the, the defense council Busch, ah, to hell
with them. Nothing. So, eh, it was to me personally, it is to me personally, it's just the beginning,
highly relevant, both on a personal and a Jewish and a personal historical eh, eh, eh aspect. But in
addition it is of major consequence, I think, in eh, eh, international or world judicial procedures.
This is not simple. This emanates directly from the Nuremberg Trials. Now, the Nuremberg Trials tried
eh, two dozen or three dozen, I forget how many, maybe 200, I'm not really sure, of the biggest fish
[scrapes throat] in the Nazi Party. And the major, many of them were executed. Certainly the first ones,
the big, biggest ones. But at Nuremberg, and I've read some serious books about this, they eh coined
a new world judicial order. There, before Nuremberg, there was no such thing. No such crime, as eh crime
against humanity. In Nuremberg, an American judge, or an American court, with Russian and a, and a British
and a, and a French, eh, eh, sat in justice eh, with German eh perpetrators of the, of the Shoah, of
the, of genocide . And eh, it sat completely new eh, eh standards of world eh, eh of a world judiciary.
Which of course was later translated into the, eh the court in The International court in The Hague and
that sort of thing. Eh, it didn't exist before. But this court too is trying a Ukrainian American,
non-citizen of any, anywhere, stateless, in a German court. These are precedents that are of major consequence.
And they serve my belief that eh, a, eh independent countries, with independent judiciaries, eh, are
not a sufficient answer to the problems of our world, of our, of our culture of world. And in that it
is establishing eh some new eh, eh, some new criteria of eh, eh, how to judge, how to eh, have a criminal,
eh criminal eh case, and eh, eh what is and what isn't allowed and even for 65 years ago. So I find
the whole case, the whole thing eh, the case as a, eh, eh, up till now, in many ways very satisfying,
very right and done completely correctly. I hope I didn't overdo it.-
No. Thank you. Now